"Why isn't there a cockroach that ate Dallas from recent history?" asks co-author Professor Jon Harrison of Arizona State University. "We can answer that question without a time machine."
Harrison and his team analysed how modern insects are designed for the fact that air today is 21% oxygen.
They focused on the tracheal system, the interconnected tubes that transport oxygen throughout bug bodies.
By extension, the researchers envisioned what insects would have looked like millions of years ago when the air was 35% oxygen.
Their findings help to explain the remains of millipedes over a metre long, 10 centimetre cockroaches and dragonflies with 75 centimetre wingspans dating to the late Palaeozoic period, just before dinosaurs came on the scene.
Using x-ray imaging, the scientists compared the tracheal dimensions of four modern beetles ranging in size from 3 millimetres to 3.5 centimetres.
They found that the tracheal system took up 20% more of the insect's body in larger beetles. In other words, the bigger an insect, the more it must invest in air tubing.
And "more tracheae ... mean less space for everything else in the body, such as the brain and reproductive system", Harrison explains.
In the oxygen-rich world of the Palaeozoic era, insects needed less air to meet their oxygen needs. As a result, they could afford smaller trachea than modern insects. 
The researchers conclude that although Palaeozoic insects had the same basic body structure as modern insects, their maximum body size was larger because smaller trachea left more room for the other essential body parts necessary to sustain their weight.
The findings were presented at this week's American Physiological Society conference in Virginia Beach.
Dr Steve Heydon, curator and collections manager of the Bohart Museum of Entomology at University of California, Davis, says that the new explanation is plausible.
But there are other possible explanations for why insects grew smaller, such as competition pressure from birds.
"Remember that there weren't any birds in the sky when the giant insects were out," says Heydon. "When flying dinosaurs and birds came around, the insects lost their exclusivity."

What a shocker of a hairdo! But would you blurt this out in front of her?
Older people accused of being 'blunt' can blame their deteriorating brain for their straight talking, an Australian researcher suggests.
Associate Professor Bill von Hippel, a psychologist at the University of New South Wales, says this deterioration means the brain can't properly inhibit older people from saying inappropriate things.
"Older adults tend to be more likely to ask about private or personal issues in public than younger adults are," says von Hippel. 
"And we have suggestive evidence that this is brought about by declines in frontal lobe functioning."
He was recently awarded an Australian Research Council grant to investigate the theory and the implications for older people's health.
Von Hippel says the stereotype is that people over the age of 65 are more likely to speak their mind because they have earned the right to, and because they are often seen as a source of wisdom.
But he says they can lose friends as it can be socially inappropriate.
"If I'm asking you about your haemorrhoids in public, even if I don't mean to be mean by doing it, I'm nevertheless humiliating you and I'm not providing you with positive emotional support," he says.
And this can be a health issue, says von Hippel, because losing friends can lead to loneliness, which is bad for both mental and physical health, especially in older people.
Experiments
In recent experiments, von Hippel interviewed 80 people from several groups of older and younger adults about the likelihood that other members of the group were likely to say certain inappropriate things.
He found that older people were more likely to ask in public if someone had put on weight, about their haemorrhoids, or whether they were still having problems with their partner.
He then tested how well the same people inhibited themselves, an ability controlled by the frontal lobes, by answering trick trivia questions.
For example, they were asked 'What colour are tigers' spots?'
He found that younger people were more likely to restrain themselves from answering the trick question, whereas older people were more likely to blurt out 'black' and then realise it was a trick.
Von Hippel says evidence from these two experiments shows that the same older people, who were more likely to be blunt, have lower inhibitory power in their frontal lobes.
Future studies
Von Hippel would now like to do similar tests on a larger number of people using magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, to check if atrophy in the frontal lobes correlates with bluntness in older adults.
For now, he can not rule out other causes for the bluntness, such as early stage dementia.
But he says the frontal lobe theory is supported by other research showing the people with frontal lobe brain damage are often more socially inappropriate.
An uncomfortable idea?
But von Hippel says his work has been criticised.
"I think it's perceived as an attack on older adults," he says. "I don't believe it is."
He says it is already accepted that atrophy of the frontal lobes occurs as you age and this affects memory and slows down brain processing. 
"What our research is showing is that there are social consequences as well."

As water falls on the jacket you get a pattern of lights that looks like water falling
A coat that glows when it rains has been created by a US-based designer.
Elise Co, of design and technology firm Aeolab in Los Angeles, will be discussing the latest version of her Puddlejumper coat at a textiles show in France this month.
Puddlejumper is a luminescent, nylon raincoat that turns the prospect of walking in the rain into an opportunity for play and performance, says Co, a former professor of new media.
It's coated with PVC and has water sensors on its back and left sleeve.
The sensors are wired via interior electronics to electroluminescent panels on the front of the jacket.
When water hits one of the sensors, the corresponding lamp lights up on the front, creating a flickering pattern of illumination that mirrors the rhythm of rainfall, says Co.
"You get a pattern of lights that really looks like water falling," she says.
Co says the electroluminescent panels are of the same kind of material used as backlighting for phones. 
The material is usually purchased pre-manufactured as plastic sheets that are cut up and wired together.
But Co mixed up the chemicals that make the panels and silk-screened them onto the jacket by hand, and hand printed the water sensors onto the jacket.
Co will help facilitate a workshop on wearable technology in Canberra next year called reSkin, where she will discuss her work.
"Although technology has the bad rap of being dry or technical, at the very least, intimidating, it is great to illuminate how creative a process it is, and how doable," she says.
"I especially like the mixture of wearable plus technology because clothing and accessories on the body are so expressive and design oriented, not only visually but also in terms of materiality and usability and wearability."
Co says her raincoats are still prototypes but the fact they are made of industrial materials mean they could be developed further.
"There is no reason why they couldn't be made durable enough to be worn normally," she says.
"It would be a matter of doing tests and tweaking the construction process to make sure they're protected well."

Caffeine is more likely to disrupt a daytime snooze than a normal night's sleep
Shiftworkers or people with jet lag who drink coffee to keep themselves awake may not be able to catnap the next day, say Canadian researchers.
They report online in the journal Neuropsychopharmacology that caffeine has a stronger disruptive effect on daytime, catch-up sleep after a night of sleep deprivation than it does on a normal night's sleep.
"Recent studies have suggested that caffeine is a measure of choice to counteract the effects of sleep deprivation on alertness and performance," say Dr Julie Carrier of Montreal's Sacred Heart Hospital and colleagues. 
"Our results suggest that this recommendation should be made with caution since using caffeine before sleeping at an abnormal circadian phase, such as during night work, might have more adverse consequences on sleep quality than before sleeping at a normal circadian time." 
Drinking caffeine at night is known to make it more difficult to fall asleep and to worsen sleep quality, Carrier and her team note.
They hypothesised that caffeine would have an even stronger effect when people were trying to recover from sleep deprivation by snoozing during the day.
To investigate, they asked 34 people drink caffeine or placebo before going to sleep at their normal bedtime.
A month later, the same people were deprived of sleep for an entire night. They were then told to fall asleep an hour after their normal wake-up time, after being given placebo or caffeine.
People received 100 milligrams of caffeine or placebo before their scheduled morning or evening bedtime, and then another 100 milligrams (or placebo) one hour before.
Sleeping after caffeine
All study participants who took caffeine took longer to fall asleep and spent more time in lighter stage 1 sleep and less time in deeper stage 2 and slow-wave sleep, the researchers found.
But people given caffeine before daytime sleep took even longer to drop off, and also slept for a shorter total time and had less REM sleep. Caffeine didn't affect night time sleep duration or REM. 
Carrier and her colleagues suggest that the greater daytime effects of caffeine are due to the fact that people are trying to fall asleep at a time when their body clock is telling them to stay awake, even though they are sleep-deprived.
Slow-wave sleep is known to last longer during daytime, catch-up sleep, they add, which normally helps override this circadian signal.
Given that caffeine reduces slow-wave sleep, it appears to allow the wake-up call to remain strong.

The site where this hand and forearm stencil was found is 4000-5000 years old
Fieldwork in what's believed to be one of the most significant rock art sites in Australia has stalled after the federal government declined to fund further research, archaeologists say.
Over the weekend scientists exploring the Wollemi National Park northwest of Sydney announced the discovery of numerous shelters, many with rock drawings and stencils up to 5000 years old.
They also discovered what's believed to be the first hafted stone axe found in southeastern Australia, estimated to be around 150 years old.
But now the archaeologists are being forced to look for international funding to continue their work and can't even afford a day trip to the remote area to protect vulnerable sites from damage by bushfires, says team co-leader Professor Paul Ta�on of Griffith University.
The largest and most significant site, an engraved platform a few kilometres from where the axe was found, is at immediate risk, Ta�on says.
The platform features large eagle and koala figures and images of what are believed to be ancestral beings.
"There is a lot of vegetation around the edge of the platform and fallen tree limbs which will provide fuel [for bushfires]," he says.
"If we get a really hot one in the next few months there is a risk that some of the engravings we've discovered won't be there any more.
"Ideally it would be good to ... just go in to clear it up but at the moment we don't have any funding to do anything at all."
Ta�on says the Australian Research Council informed him last week that his grant application, worth several hundred thousand dollars a year over the next five years, had been knocked back in favour of international projects.
"The application was for further work in the Wollemi and other parts of the country on rock art," he says.
"It looks like no rock art projects will be getting up, and hardly any Australian archaeology projects at all. Most of the money went for people working on archaeological projects overseas."
He says the latest trip and previous surveys of the Wollemi bushland, where the Jurassic-era Wollemi pine was also discovered, have been funded by team members and international organisations.
The researchers are currently talking to a New Zealand company for funding to help them return for more surveying in April.
"Given what we've found on each trip there's probably lots more out there," he says. 
An Australian Research Council spokesperson could not comment on individual funding applications, but confirms some applications for international archaeological projects were successful in the last round.
"Yes, we did fund a number of archaeological projects ... and several involved research overseas," she says.
"But it is all by researchers who reside predominantly in Australia."
The future of the axe
Meanwhile the future of the axe, which still has traces of resin most likely made from plants and beeswax, remains up in the air.
Ta�on says it will either remain undisturbed in the cave where it was found or be moved to the Australian Museum in Sydney for public display.
"Perhaps it can remain and eventually turn to dust," he says.
"Sometimes removing objects destroys the context and connection to the larger landscape and history of a particular area."
But a final decision about whether the axe should stay or go will be made by local Aboriginal groups, he says.
Dave Pross, from the Darkinjung Local Aboriginal Land Council, wants to see the axe in a museum to prevent it being picked up by bushwalkers and ending up on an online auction site like many other Aboriginal artefacts.
 He'll argue for this at the next land council meeting.
"My view is to get it out and put it into a museum because bushwalkers can come in, find something and put it on eBay," he says.
"Let's put these things in a museum, as long as they can be used for a display, or showed to students, and they'll be safe."

Horned beetles can have big weapons or big testes, not both
Beetles with the biggest horns have the smallest testes, say scientists who show that in evolutionary terms you can't have it all.
They say their finding is clear evidence of an evolutionary trade-off between the ability to fight off sexual competitors and reproductive potency. 
Or put simply, the ability to find a mate and the ability to fertilise her.
Professor Leigh Simmons of the University of Western Australia and US researcher Professor Douglas Emlen of the University of Montana publish their findings online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The researchers looked at beetles of the genus Onthophagus, dung beetles known for the size and variety of their horns.
"What we did was test a fundamental assumption underlying evolution ... that males face a trade-off between competing for access to lots of females and investment in gaining fertilisation with those females," Simmons says.
"They need to have big horns to win fights and get females and they need to have big testes in order to win in sperm competition.
"But they can't do both, so species which invest very heavily in their horns tend to invest less in their testes."
The study also demonstrates the theory of sperm competition, which occurs when females mate with more than one partner, Simmons says.
According to this theory, male rivalry continues after a mate has been found as sperm from different males compete to fertilise an egg.
"Theory predicts that males should increase their investment in sperm production as sperm competition in increased," he says.
Manipulating horns
Simmons tested the theory by cauterising the area of the developing beetle pupa, where the horns would grow, destroying cells and preventing horn growth.
He found that if horn development was inhibited, the pupa compensated by developing larger testes.
The principle is known as a resource allocation trade-off, he says.
"They got a fixed amount of resources to allocate to various structures, to their legs, their wings, their horns and to their testes and other important organs," he says.
"If [the developing beetle] doesn't produce horns those males then produce bigger testes because they have resources that weren't used for horn growth."
Other examples
Simmons says the principle of resource allocation has been demonstrated in other animal studies.
For example, there is some evidence that bats trade the size of their testes for brain power.
And a recent study showed that stalk-eyed flies, in which eye span width is a measure of sexual desirability, trade testes size for the width of their eyes.
"There have been suggestions of a trade-off between gaining mates and gaining fertilisation but our study is probably one of the most conclusive studies to date to have demonstrated this," Simmons says.

The new element 118 travels through the accelerator to the detector
Scientists say they have discovered a superheavy element, known as 118, albeit one that has only lasted a fraction of a second over months of experiments.
Scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California and Russia's Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna expect the new element to be a noble gas that lies below radon in the periodic table.
They publish their results in the journal Physical Review C.
Scientists discovered the last naturally occurring element on the periodic table in 1925 but have since tried to create new heavier elements. 
In the latest experiments, the scientists bombarded the element californium with 10^19 calcium ions to create two atoms of element 118.
The atoms of element 118, also known as ununoctium, lasted 0.9 milliseconds, they say.
The team then observed the element decay to element 116, then to 114.
This makes it the fifth new element for the collaborating scientists (113, 114, 115, 116 and now 118).
An announcement in 2002 from researchers at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California claiming they had found element 118 was later shown to have been a fraud. 
"We selected a completely different nuclear reaction, performed with completely different people in a different laboratory," says Dr Ken Moody, the Livermore team leader.
"Everything we do is checked and double checked.
"The data analysis is performed by both us and our Russian colleagues. We do everything that we can possibility do to both avoid the possibility of intentional fraud and of mistaken handling of the data." 
The Livermore-Dubna team says it's now looking to create element 120, by bombarding plutonium with iron isotopes.
So it looks like high school and university science labs may still have to replace their periodic table posters yet again.

One day we might be filling our cars with biodiesel produced using genetically modified organisms
Genetically modified microorganisms could one day make it easier and cheaper to produce biofuels, experts say.
A symposium convened by the Australian Institute of Agricultural Science and Technology in Canberra this week will hear about future directions in biofuel technology and ways of meeting national biofuel targets.
Speaker Leo Hyde, research and development manager at DuPont Australia, says improving the yeasts and bacteria that turn raw biomass into fuel is a major step in reducing the use of fossil fuels.
Hyde says the company is developing bacteria specifically tailored to the production of butanol.
Like ethanol, butanol can be produced from the sugars contained in cellulose waste from crops like corn or sugar cane, and even logging waste.
"We have bugs now but they're not efficient enough," he says.
"What we're working on is another bug that we believe will be far more efficient than the current process [of producing butanol].
"You'd re-engineer it to make the butanol pathway more efficient. We'll modify pathways, how it uses energy, to improve the yield of the product you want."
What are the benefits?
Phillip Calais is a renewable energy consultant and former lecturer in environmental science at Murdoch University, where he's involved in a biofuels project.
He says there are benefits in using genetically modified or GM bugs in the fermentation of fuels like butanol, which he says is more "oil-like" than ethanol and mixes better with petrol, but is more difficult to produce.
Butane is made from a raw product that is then broken down to starch or sugars, fermented and purified.
"With butanol, fermentation has to be very pure. If there are any weird strains of bacteria it really upsets the fermentation process," he says.
The bugs that are currently used are also destroyed once butanol reaches a certain concentration, which means more costly and time consuming processing is needed to purify it after fermentation.
"By using GM you can actually breed up different bugs that can survive a higher concentration of purity in the butanol," Calais says.
"If you can make it more concentrated in the first place by using better bugs you can do less processing later."
What about the risks?
The use of GM organisms holds promise for "certain niches", says Adrian Lake founder and president of the Biodiesel Association of Australia.
But he says the technology is still being developed and has potential risks.
"There's potential danger in changing any bugs," he says.
"If it's an organism that's extremely aggressive and has to be highly controlled because it will replicate and damage other organisms, that's a concern."

'Fred the Thread', a caterpillar that lives in the stem of a New Zealand wetland plant
'Fred the Thread' is vying for a place in the record books as the world's thinnest caterpillar, its discoverers say.
The New Zealand caterpillar is barely 0.9 millimetres wide and is the larval stage of an entirely new genus and species of moth Houdinia flexilissima.
But scientists at Landcare Research, who discovered Fred, are concerned about his survival.
This is because he lives in the cane rush Sporadanthus ferrugineus, a threatened wetland plant that forms peat.
The researchers publish details of Fred in the latest issue of the journal Invertebrate Systematics.
Invertebrate ecologist Dr Corinne Watts was researching the restoration of areas mined for peat at Torehape on New Zealand's North Island. And she was intrigued by star-shaped tunnels in the plant stems.
"It was obvious that something was making them. But every time I cut open a stem there was nothing inside," she says.
"At the time the caterpillars were so tiny that I kept missing them. It wasn't until they grew bigger that I finally saw a bright orange thread and thought 'gotcha'." 
Taxonomist Dr Robert Hoare used an electron microscope to measure the caterpillar which, although thin, grows to a respectable few centimetres long. 
"Sporadanthus stems are very narrow so to live inside them the caterpillar has to get longer rather than fatter," says Watts. 
Finding the tiny adult moths, only half a centimetre long, proved almost as difficult.
That was until, using a technique borne of frustration, the scientists learnt that kicking the plants elicited a cloud of them. 
The moths are active at dusk and survive for a brief breeding period of four to six weeks between October and November.
Although the entire life cycle is not yet fully understood, it is clear that over two or three years the caterpillar goes through the usual stages of moulting, pupating and metamorphosing into a most unusual moth, all within the confines of a 5 millimetre wide stem.
Such a feat, as well as the remarkable way the species has managed to elude detection for so long, prompted the new genus to be named after the renowned escapologist Harry Houdini. 
Fred the Thread's host plant is found in one of three remaining peat bogs on the North Island, the researchers say.
Over the years, drainage and conversion of peat bogs to pasture has resulted in habitat loss, leading for calls to put the plant on the endangered list and to reappraise the conservation status of the moth.

It could take centuries, not decades, to melt the dense ice packs that accumulate and creep down the Himalayas, says a scientist
Glaciers in the Himalayas have not drastically shrunk despite climate change and are unlikely to melt away in coming decades, a Chinese scientist says.
Professor Zhang Wenjing, glacier expert at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, discounted previous forecasts that glaciers across western China could disappear in decades or the Himalayan glaciers could melt away in 50 years, reports the Xinhua news agency.
"Those predictions may be excessively pessimistic," he says. "So far glaciers in the middle and eastern part of the Himalayas have not shrunk on any large scale."
Zhang does not question climate change, but says it would take perhaps centuries to melt the dense ice packs that accumulate and creep down the Himalayas.
"The glaciers in the region are melting comparatively slowly," says Zhang, who is taking part in an international expedition to study the mountains. 
Zhang's comments appear to clash with the conclusions of many other scientists and conservationists that many parts of the Asian mountain chain are likely to experience severe melting as global temperatures rise in coming decades.
In the past 40 years, glaciers across the Tibetan plateau that spills from China into South Asia have shrunk by 6600 square kilometres, especially since the 1980s, the conservation group WWF says in a 2005 report.
The glaciers now cover about 105,000 square kilometres, it says. 
A report on climate change organised by Chinese government agencies says last year that considerable uncertainty surrounds the effects of rising average temperatures on glaciers in different regions.
But the report forecast that "by 2050 glaciers in China's west will have dramatically shrunk".

Scientists have fired lasers at cells to make them vibrate, then picked up the characteristic sound of melanoma cells in the blood
Doctors looking to see if cancer has spread may be able to one day simply listen for it, US researchers report. 
Researchers at the University of Missouri-Columbia say they have used a technique called photoacoustic detection to pick up the characteristic vibrations of melanoma cells in the blood.
They say their method could let oncologists spot as few as 10 cancer cells in a blood sample, catching a tumour's spread before it can settle into another organ.
Writing in the October issue of the journal Optics Letters, the researchers say they combined laser techniques from the field of optics and ultrasound techniques from acoustics.
They used a laser to make cells vibrate and then picked up the characteristic sound of melanoma cells.
The researchers say they were able to detect melanoma cells obtained from actual patients.
The dark, microscopic granules of melanin in the melanoma cancer cells absorb the energy bursts from the blue laser light.
As the melanoma cells expand and contract, they generate crackling sounds that can be picked them up with special microphones and analysed by computer. 
Other human cells do not contain pigments with the same colour as melanin, so the melanin signature is easy to tell apart from other noises, says Assistant Professor John Viator, a biomedical engineer who worked on the study. 
"The only reason there could be melanin in the human blood is that there would be melanoma cells," he says. 
A blood screening test could reassure patients who have a growth removed, or tell a doctor to start chemotherapy quickly because the cancer has already started to spread. 
"It could take just 30 minutes to find out if there are any circulating cancer cells," Viator says. 
Because of melanin, melanoma is the only type of cancer that can be detected in this way.
But the researchers say they could try using artificial materials to act as light absorbers and as noise makers.
"We're looking for methods to attach other kinds of absorbers to cancer cells," Viator says.

The fish skull emerging from the rock it was found in
Fish developed features characteristic of land animals much earlier than once thought, say researchers.
Dr John Long of Museum Victoria and colleagues base their conclusions on an uncrushed 380 million-year-old fish fossil found in Western Australia.
"The specimen is the most perfect complete three-dimensional fish of its kind ever discovered in the whole world," says Long, who reports the team's findings online today in the journal Nature.
"It looks like it died yesterday. You can still open and close the mouth."
Long says the preserved remains of a Gogonasus fish from the Devonian period were found last year in the remote Kimberley area at the Gogo fossil site, once an 'ancient barrier reef' teeming with fish.
Previous analyses based on limited material suggested Gogonasus had relatively primitive features, says Long.
But when his team used a CT scanner at the Australian National University to analyse this new fossil, it found the fish had a number of features common to land animals.
"It's hiding a lot of deceptively advanced features that were not recognised before until we had such a perfect specimen," says Long.
For example, Gogonasus had hole in its skull similar to that found in the first land animals, he says.
This hole eventually became the Eustachian tube in higher vertebrates, says Long.
His team's analysis also revealed the fish's pectoral fin had the same pattern of bones as the forelimbs or arms of land animals, called tetrapods.
"It's definitely a fish. It's got gills, it swims in water, it's got fins," says Long. "But it's a fish that is showing the beginnings of the tetrapod's advanced body plan that would eventually carry on to all living land animals."
Gogonasus also had a cheek bone structure similar to early amphibian and a single pair of nostrils, like we have, says Long.
Wolf in sheep's clothing
Earlier this year scientists reported the discovery of Tiktaalik roseae, a 375 million-year-old species of fish that filled the evolutionary gap in the transition between water and land animals.
While Tiktaalik had a skull that was identical to an amphibian, Gogonasus looks much more like a fish, says Long.
"This particular fish is a bit like a wolf in sheep's clothing," he says.

This image of the lunar south pole, together with radar echoes, was thought to be evidence for ice. Now scientists say it isn't ice, just rough terrain
Hopes that the Moon's south pole has a vast hoard of ice that could be used to establish a lunar colony are sadly unfounded, a new study says. 
In 1994, radar echoes sent back in an experiment involving a US orbiter called Clementine appeared to show a treasure trove of frozen water below craters near the lunar south pole.
At the time, scientists saw this as evidence of ice in areas that were permanently shaded from the Sun.
If so, such a find would be an invaluable boost to colonisation, as the ice could be used to provide water as well as hydrogen as fuel.
NASA is looking closely at the south pole as a potential site for the US return mission to the Moon, scheduled to take place by 2020.
But a paper published today in the journal Nature says the Clementine data was most probably misinterpreted.
Professor Donald Campbell of Cornell University and colleagues, including Dr Nicholas Stacy from Australia's Defence Science and Technology Organisation, collected radar images of the Moon's south pole to a resolution of 20 metres.
They looked especially at Shackleton crater, which had generated most interest.
The team found that a particular radar signature called the circular polarisation ratio, which in the Clementine experiment was taken to indicate thick deposits of ice, could also be created by echoes from the rough terrain and walls of impact craters. 
The signature was found in both sunny and permanently shady areas of crater, which suggests that the reflection comes from rocky debris, not thick ice deposits.
If there is any ice at the south pole, it probably comes from tiny, scattered grains that probably account for only 1-2% of the local dust, the authors suggest.
"Any planning for future exploitation of hydrogen at the Moon's south pole should be constrained by this low average abundance rather than by the expectation of localised deposits at higher concentrations," the paper says.
The research involved sending a radar signal from the Arecibo telescope in Puerto Rico.
The signal hit the southern lunar region and the reflection was picked up by the US Green Bank Telescope.

The latest study on the best time of year to shear sheep overturns 20 years of thinking
Farmers who want to produce better quality wool don't necessarily need to shear their sheep in autumn, Australian researchers have found.
Angus Campbell, a PhD student from the University of Melbourne, and colleagues show that there's no particular shearing season that consistently improves wool strength.
That finding could have important implications for Australia's multi-billion dollar wool industry.
For the past 20 years or so, many farmers have sheared their sheep in autumn in the hope of getting better quality fibres and a higher price for their wool.
"The idea behind this is that wool gets thinner in summer and then thickens in late autumn," Campbell says.
This would make the wool stronger because it would be thin on the end but thicker and stronger in the middle.
To test this theory, Campbell and his colleagues designed a study that used real life conditions on two commercial Merino farms west of Geelong in Victoria.
Each year for five years, they sheared 1000 ewes and lambs in three different seasons and measured the quality of the wool.
One-third of the sheep were shorn in December, one-third in March and another third in May.
"These were three realistic shearing times based on other research and talking to wool growers," he says.
The result? "The wool strength from those three shearing times was the same," Campbell says.
The connection between wool fibre thickness and season has more to do with nutrition than weather, the researcher explains.
In summer the fibres tend to get thinner as the flocks rely more on dried feed, while the rains of autumn bring protein-rich green grass, which makes the wool quickly get thicker.
But in spring, when many farmers have their sheep bearing lambs, a similar thing happens because the ewes devote all their energy into growing the lamb, and not into the wool.
"This all means that among ewes and lambs no annual shearing time is going to consistently shear through the weak part of the fibre," Campbell says.
In a way, the results are good news for farmers, he says.
"It means that if a farmer has a really good reason for choosing a shearing time based on something specific to the farm, then I reckon they can go ahead and do it and not worry about it harming their wool value," he says.
Campbell's research will form part of his PhD, which is to be submitted later this year.

It's how you see things. Throughout the ages, scientists have been quick to judge scientists whose work doesn't fit their view of the world
Scientists may say they are dispassionate defenders of the unfettered pursuit of truth. But history suggests they are often guilty of being irrational and narrow-minded, says an Australian philosopher.
Emeritus Professor Miles Little of the University of Sydney argues his case in the current issue of the journal Medical Humanities.
"Science is supposed to be the ultimate in rationality. It's supposed to be the ultimate in evidence and the assessment of evidence," says Little, a former surgeon now at the university's Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine.
"But science doesn't behave like this in the face of aberrant science."
Aberrant science can involve the use of methods or the arrival at conclusions the majority don't agree with and is often shunned as if it was fraudulent, he says.
And yet, says Little, some aberrant science is by honest hardworking scientists who produce very important results.
While fraud is clearly an undesirable form of aberrant science, Little says those whose only crime is to use unusual methods or reach unusual conclusions should not be treated with the same contempt.
Instead, he says, they should be greeted with open-mindedness, a feature that is supposed to be the hallmark of good science.
Little says an example of such unfairly treated aberrant science is something that challenges the current scientific paradigm, the given set of assumptions about how the world works.
An example of this is the claim, made by immunologist Dr Jacques Benveniste in the late 1980s.
He said a solution of antibodies so dilute they were unlikely to contain any molecules could activate white blood cells, a claim could be used to support the claims of homoeopathy.
Little says the scientific community's immediate response to what they saw as "dysfunctional science" was to attack Benveniste personally and to vilify and humiliate him.
"The way the judgement was made was not scientific," says Little.
While subsequent attempts failed to reproduce Benveniste's results, Little says the outcome of other cases of aberrant science have been eventually accepted. 
One example is Professor Joseph Lister who argued against the wisdom of the 19th century that pus was a sign of infection by germs, which should be prevented from entering wounds.
"The majority of surgeons rejected it out of hand," says Little.
Lister was seen as a "young whippersnapper, defying well-established tradition, flying in the face of authority" and it took the next generation of surgeons to accept his views.
Little says a related category of unfairly treated aberrant science is something that challenges the accepted ideology of the day. 

Scientists have made an invisibility cloak that works with microwaves. But there are many technical challenges before a cloak could work with visible light to make someone invisible
Scientists say they have found a way to hide an object from microwave radiation in a first step towards making what they hope will be an invisibility cloak.
The cloaking device is said to deflect microwaves so they flow around a 'hidden' object inside it with little distortion, making it seem as if there was almost nothing there.
Such a device could one day be used to elude radar or in wireless communications.
But the researchers, like many scientists, are not working with any particular goal in mind but hope its uses will become apparent later.
"It's not quite Harry Potter," says Professor David Smith of Duke University in North Carolina, referring to the child's fictional character who can conceal himself in a magical cloak. 
"It's not exactly perfect; we can do better. But it demonstrates the mechanism, the way the waves swirl around the centre region where you want to conceal things," says Smith, who publishes the results online today in the journal Science.
Building a cloak
Every solid object scatters radiation that hits it, from microwaves through to visible light. It is this scattering that allows objects to be seen, whether with the eye or using radar or ultrasound. 
The cloaking device manipulates this scattering effect.
It relies on new, laboratory-made materials called metamaterials, engineered composite materials whose properties can be manipulated by tweaking their structure.
For instance, metamaterials can decrease both the scattering caused by a solid object and the shadow it casts. 
In this case the cloak is quite thick, Smith says, twice as big as the 15 centimetre copper tube it hides. And the materials are arranged in concentric rings.
In May the same researchers reported their theory, and it took them just a few months to demonstrate it.
The cloak reduces both back scatter, or reflection of microwaves, and forward scatter, or shadows. 
Limitations
The cloak only works in 2D. But the researchers have already started work on a 3D version.
The cloak also only works with microwaves of a specific wavelength. And the researchers hope to broaden the range of wavelengths that it can block.
But making something invisible to the human eye would present a much greater challenge.
Such a cloak would have to simultaneously interact with all the wavelengths that make up light.
"It is very unlikely that we could do it with this technology in the visible [spectrum]," Smith says.
It would have to be scaled down to nanotechnology levels, but the metals involved behave differently on that scale, he says. 
Eluding radar
Microwave cloaks might be useful for eluding radar, says Professor Costas Soukoulis, a theorist with the US Department of Energy's Ames Laboratory in Iowa.
"This is very, very important that experiments have produced what theorists had predicted," Soukoulis told Science.
The researchers are funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the design is based on a theory proposed by Professor John Pendry of Imperial College London.

Brain damage can improve your artistic skills but can also make your paintings less 'emotional'. So does everyone have the potential to become the next Picasso?
Damage to a particular part of the brain can trigger artistic talent, US neurologists show.
When they looked at one particular artist whose frontal and temporal lobes of the brain had deteriorated, they found she had developed new artistic skills. 
The US researchers published their study into the artistic effects of frontotemporal lobar dementia in the latest issue of the journal Neurology.
There have been reports of previously inartistic people becoming talented visual artists after developing this condition.
But it is not clear whether the brain atrophy is releasing dormant talent, or the disease itself has somehow triggered the artistic expression. 
To investigate, Dr Valeria Drago of the University of Florida at Gainesville and others studied the art of a woman who had been an artist before developing this type of brain damage.
As the woman's condition worsened, they found, her artistic technique improved, but the emotional power of her work decreased.
"We can really follow how the paintings have been changed following the disease," says Drago. 
Drago and her team gathered 40 of the woman's paintings, including several from the period before she developed symptoms. Some were when her symptoms were beginning, and some were painted later. 
The researchers then gave 18 men and women training on how to evaluate six different artistic qualities, and asked them to rate the paintings.
Ratings for the paintings' artistic skill rose as the woman's disease progressed.
But ratings on the paintings' 'evocative impact' and 'closure' fell. 
Evocative impact is the ability of a work of art to elicit an emotional reaction, while closure is the sense that a painting is finished and complete. 
Drago and her team note that the condition leaves the parts of the brain at work in drawing, painting and other skills relatively intact.
The part of the brain the disease does affect may typically inhibit this region of the brain, so when it is damaged artistic talents have freer rein, they suggest. 
The researchers also point out that patients with this form of brain damage may have damage to the limbic system, a network within the brain essential for mediating emotions.
This damage could in turn impair an artist's ability to paint emotionally affecting paintings, or to portray emotion visually. 
Drago says she and her team are continuing to study creativity and the brain, and are currently looking at how normal ageing may change creativity.

Women who believe that men are better at maths do worse in maths tests than women who don't believe the stereotype
When women believe they are genetically bad at maths, the belief becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy, research shows.
The divide between men's and women's talent at maths may therefore be due to misinformation more than genetic destiny.
A report published in the latest issue of the journal Science shows that women exposed to theories saying females are genetically bad at maths perform far worse on maths tests than women who had not been exposed to such beliefs. 
Canadian psychologists Associate Professor Steven Heine and doctoral student Ilan Dar-Nimrod, from the University of British Columbia, studied how 220 female students performed in maths tests after reading fake research reports.
The psychologists had invented the reports, which contained bogus claims about men being better at maths.
One phoney paper claimed to have discovered that the male Y chromosome gives men a 5% edge over women in maths.
Another fake paper claimed that men have a 5% edge because maths teachers stereotype girl and boy students at a very young age.
Heine says the research clearly shows that women who read the fake report about genetics did much worse in the maths test. 
The research, he says, shows that people believe they can overcome stereotyping and continue to try.
But if they blame their genetic makeup and believe they have an innate lack of ability, they give up, he says.
"People think genes are at the core of who we are," he says. "But much genetics research is still unproved. Just raising the question about genes has harmful consequences."
Often, says Heine, science about research on genes affecting gender, obesity or homosexuality is "grossly simplified" in the media. 
"The reports themselves have the potential to undermine people's motivations. If I believe that genes have a deterministic influence on my weight, will I still struggle to keep up with my diet and exercise routine?
"Genetics research is a booming industry, and every week [scientists] are identifying a new gene," he says.
But genes work in complicated ways scientists don't yet understand, he warns, and "not all scientific theories are created equal".
So-called 'brain sex', genetic differences between men's and women's brains, is a controversial research subject. 
It's so contentious that earlier this year Professor Lawrence Summers resigned as president of Harvard University amid an uproar after he suggested that women have less intrinsic ability in maths and science than men.

Champion racehorse Phar Lap died more than 70 years ago. But a scientific test has sparked fresh debate about what caused his demise (Melbourne Museum)
Claims that champion Australian racehorse Phar Lap was killed by arsenic poisoning are premature, says an expert who has cast doubt on reports today that science has solved one of the nation's biggest sporting mysteries.
Professor Rob Lewis, director of the Monash University Centre for Synchrotron Science, says there are too many "ifs, whats and wherefores" to declare the case of Phar Lap's unexplained death shut.
Lewis, who has seen the results of synchrotron analysis of Phar Lap's hair conducted in the US, says the research is preliminary.
He says it's too early to tell whether arsenic detected in the hair is from a chemical used during the taxidermy process to preserve the horse, or the results of foul play.
Phar Lap, the 1930 Melbourne Cup champion and one of Australia's greatest sporting icons, died in 1932, shortly after winning America's richest race the Agua Caliente Handicap.
The exact cause of his death has never been proved although there was speculation it was the work of gangsters.
So Dr Ivan Kempson, a research fellow based at the University of South Australia, came up with the idea of using a synchrotron to analyse Phar Lap's hair.
"All of our analysis so far indicates that he most probably did consume a dose of arsenic just prior to his death," he says.
Kempson says analysis by the Advanced Photon Source synchrotron near Chicago shows two forms of arsenic. 
One of them, lead arsenide, could be associated with preservation, he says. But the other is more likely to be the result of ingestion.
"The other type of arsenic is consistent by its distribution and location and chemistry with him ingesting the arsenic between 30-40 hours prior to his death," he says.
"We've been going through a process of trying to prove ourselves wrong and look for alternative explanations but so far the results are consistent with him consuming arsenic." 
Horse hair samples
But Lewis says more work is needed to analyse samples from the stuffed horse, which is preserved for public display at the Melbourne Museum.
"Nobody's ever actually analysed hair from an animal that's been stuffed for this long," he says.
"What you really need to prove this kind of thing is 20 horses that were stuffed, and you check all of them and if you find a major problem in one of them you say that one's different. But in this case we've got one.
"And given that we don't actually understand exactly what procedure was used to preserve Phar Lap, how do we know whether the stuff was used in the preserving or whether it was given to him beforehand?"
Lewis says synchrotrons can closely analyse the structure of chemicals like arsenic.
"The synchrotron without any shadow of a doubt gives you more information than you could have got in other ways. But whether or not it's conclusive, would it stand up in a court of law, personally I have my doubts," he says.
"There are all sorts of things we don't quite know, we don't know the process that was used in tanning the hide, [we don't know] what has happened to the condition of that arsenic in the years since Phar Lap died. 
"Things oxidise, things change, bugs get in, all sorts of things change. Biological materials don't stay the same and clearly that sort of thing might have happened."
Kempson says more research is planned to hopefully finally lay the case to rest, including comparison with similar cases.
So far, Phar Lap's sample has only been compared with a stuffed monkey, he says. 
What is a synchrotron?
Lewis describes a synchrotron, or particle accelerator, as essentially a large x-ray machine that can concentrate a large number of x-rays onto a tiny object like a single hair.
The x-rays are produced by particles that are accelerated around a large ring at close to the speed of light. As the particles pass magnetic fields in the ring they emit rays approximately a billion times brighter than the Sun.
"In this case instead of looking at the x-rays that go straight through the hair ... you look at the x-rays that scatter off it and come off in different directions," he says.
"Those x-rays carry information about things like the arsenic and the chemistry of the arsenic."

No single event, like a huge meteor strike, is solely responsible for a mass extinction, says new research. Not even the demise of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago
If you can't decide if you prefer meteor impacts, volcanoes or some other explanation for Earth's biggest mass extinction events, take heart: you no longer have to choose.
A new statistical study of mass extinctions throughout the history of life on Earth is backing the idea that no single meteor, volcanic eruption or other lone gunman is ever to blame.
This even applies to the Cretaceous-Tertiary event that brought the end of dinosaurs 65 million years ago, the US researchers say.
Instead, the worst die-offs happen when some sort of interminable, multi-generational pressure on life is combined with a few powerful blows.
It's what is now being called the press-pulse theory of mass extinctions. 
Reading the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction literature and conversations with colleagues "made me wonder whether the simplistic scenario of 'everything's fine until one day in June when the asteroid hits and everything goes to hell-in-a-hand-basket' really explains the diversity of data," says plant fossil expert Associate Professor Nan Arens of Hobart and William Smith Colleges in New York. 
Wouldn't it make more sense, she surmised, if certain species were already vulnerable when the triggering event happened?
To test the idea, she and then-undergraduate student Ian West compiled a large database of marine organisms and their extinctions through geological time. 
They divvied up the past 488 million years into four groups: suspected meteor impacts (pulses), gigantic volcanic flood basalt eruptions (presses), periods with neither presses nor pulses, and times when press and pulse coincided.
They then compared average extinction rates in each group. 
Flood basalt eruptions are considered presses because they release vast amounts of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and can change the Earth's climate. 
Single or multiple event?
The researchers found similar extinction rates when a pulse or press occurred by itself, and when neither was occurring, says Arens.
"However, when an impact occurred during a time of volcanic flood, that produced higher extinction rates."
Arens is presenting her work this week at the annual meeting of the Geological Society of America in Philadelphia.
"The goal of our work was to come up with a unifying theory of mass extinctions," says West.
They also wanted to make the theory applicable to the rapid extinctions now being seen as a result of accelerating climate change (press) and the ongoing destruction of wild habitats by human activities worldwide (pulse).
"[The theory] is essentially a more eloquent way of saying what I and many other palaeontologists have been saying for many years," says Professor Gerta Keller of Princeton University.
"Namely that the impact-kill hypothesis is all wrong. Impacts alone could not have been the killing mechanism for the K-T [Cretaceous-Tertiary event] or any of the other major mass extinctions." 
Volcanic activity
In the late Cretaceous case massive volcanism, the Deccan Traps eruption in India, and attendant climate change, coincided with an impact that pushed highly stressed biota over the brink. 
"I'm very happy they have done the analysis based on the literature and come up with the same conclusions that palaeontologists have been preaching all along," Keller says.

Viruses may be able to cross into the brain, causing steady damage over the years
Forget where you left your glasses? Did those keys go missing again? A virus may be to blame.
Viruses that cause a range of ills from the common cold to polio may be able to infect the brain and cause steady damage, a team at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota reports.
"Our study suggests that virus-induced memory loss could accumulate over the lifetime of an individual and eventually lead to clinical cognitive memory deficits," says Dr Charles Howe, who reports the findings in the latest issue of the journal Neurobiology of Disease. 
The viruses are called picornaviruses and infect more than 1 billion people worldwide each year. 
They include the virus that causes polio, as well as colds and diarrhoea. People contract an average of two or three such infections a year. 
"We think picornavirus family members cross into the brain and cause a variety of brain injuries. For example, the polio virus can cause paralysis," Howe says. 
"It can injure the spinal cord and different parts of the brain responsible for motor function. In the [mouse] virus we studied, it did the same thing and also injured parts of the brain responsible for memory." 
The researchers infected mice with a virus called Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus, which is similar to human poliovirus.
Infected mice later had difficulty learning to navigate a maze. Some were barely affected, while others were completely unable to manage.
When the mice were killed and their brains examined, a correlating amount of damage was seen in the hippocampus region, related to learning and memory.
One virus particularly likely to cause brain damage is enterovirus 71, which is common in Asia, the researchers say.
It can cross over into the brain and cause encephalitis, a brain inflammation that can lead to coma and death. 
"Our findings suggest that picornavirus infections throughout the lifetime of an individual may chip away at the cognitive reserve, increasing the likelihood of detectable cognitive impairment as the individual ages," the researchers write.
"We hypothesise that mild memory and cognitive impairments of unknown aetiology may, in fact, be due to accumulative loss of hippocampus function caused by repeated infection with common and widespread neurovirulent picornaviruses."
Other viruses kill brain cells, including the herpes virus and HIV.

This mock-up illustrates the dangers foxes pose to penguins on Phillip Island
A drug that makes vixens neglect their cubs could help solve Australia's feral fox problem, researchers say.
They are looking at the drug cabergoline, which reduces fertility and interferes with maternal instincts, to see if it could control foxes on Phillip Island in Victoria.
The island is home to a renowned penguin colony and up to 150 unwanted foxes.
A fox can kill up to 30 penguins a night, says Dr Roger Kirkwood, a biologist at the Phillip Island Nature Park.
"We need to eradicate foxes from the island because just one fox can step in there and do so much damage," he says.
The foxes also feast on migratory mutton birds that visit the island, says Kirkwood.
He's working with University of Tasmania pharmacologist Professor Stuart McLean to study cabergoline.
In humans, the drug is used to treat Parkinson's disease.
But the scientists are interested in using the drug in foxes as it acts on the brain's dopamine receptors to block secretion of the hormone prolactin.
"[Foxes] rely on prolactin to become pregnant and maintain pregnancy and to lactate, and also for their mothering instinct after the cubs are born," says McLean. 
Because it suppresses maternal instincts, cabergoline makes vixens less likely to care for their cubs by bringing them food, grooming them and teaching them survival skills, which reduces their chances of survival.
The drug has not yet been tested on foxes on the island but preliminary research will be presented at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress next month.
A study looking at how long cabergoline remains in fox bait has also been submitted to the journal Wildlife Research.
Toll on penguins
Kirkwood says if foxes are allowed to breed out of control they could destroy Phillip Island's 60,000 strong penguin population.
Foxes have already reduced the number of penguin colonies on Phillip Island from 12 to just one in the past 80 years.
More than 1000 foxes have been eliminated since the introduction of a control program on the island in 1980, which includes shooting, poisoning, fumigating dens and using dogs to hunt the foxes.
Kirkwood says although foxes only live about five years the population is resilient and recovers quickly.
"If we stopped our program we reckon the carrying capacity of the island would be over 400 foxes, and they would eliminate the penguins given time if we didn't control them," he says.

Are you a YouTube legend? Be careful your videos don't get you into legal hot water
Internet law experts have called for Australian copyright laws to be amended so people can post online videos of themselves miming pop songs without risking prosecution.
Researcher Damien O'Brien and Professor Brian Fitzgerald of Queensland University of Technology (QUT) say miming copyright material and posting it online may be currently illegal.
They will explore copyright law in relation to the popular YouTube site in the Internet Law Bulletin.
The video sharing website YouTube hosts more than 65,000 new videos every day, many made by amateurs.
"A 12 year old girl uploads a video of herself lip-syncing the latest Shakira pop song onto YouTube and is served with a copyright infringement notice," they write.
"Has she breached copyright law?" The answer, they say, is yes. 
"Certainly many of the videos that are uploaded [onto YouTube] probably infringe copyright if they're reproductions or communications of the whole, or even a little bit of the [original]."
O'Brien says while there have been no prosecutions in Australia yet, major music companies, particularly in the US, have been active in demanding that such videos be removed from YouTube.
Calls for change
He says amendments to Australian copyright law currently being considered by parliament fail to take cases like amateur miming into account.
O'Brien says some types of reproduction are allowed under fair trading provisions in the amendments, but these don't cover cases like the one highlighted in his paper.
He's arguing for a defence of material being "highly transformative" and not competing with the original market. 
This would allow a 12 year old amateur to upload a video of herself miming to a sound track with impunity.
"It doesn't have to be a radical change [to the amendments], but something that allows someone to remix a  small amount of someone else's work and put it in a different context as long as it's not for commercial purposes and doesn't compete with the original," he says.
"It's pretty hard to see why something like that shouldn't be allowed."
New laws
The federal government last week introduced its proposed changes to copyright law into parliament.
Announcing the move, attorney general Philip Ruddock said the bill demonstrated "the government's commitment to ensuring laws reflect the continual changes to the technical landscape".
A spokesperson says following concerns about the bill, debate has been adjourned while a senate committee gives the legislation further consideration.
"The purpose of draft exposure bills is to circulate them for comment and expose any potential flaws before the legislation is introduced to parliament," the spokesperson says.
O'Brien's paper is also on the QUT ePrints website.

Scientists study Rio Tinto in Spain to learn more about Mars. The river has an extreme acidic pH and a high concentration of heavy metals, yet  microbes grow there. So could the harsh conditions on Mars also harbour life?
The US space agency's first experiments to look for organic matter on Mars may not have been sensitive enough to detect life, concludes a team of researchers studying Martian-like soils in remote regions on Earth.
The twin NASA Viking probes landed on the surface of Mars in 1976 to search for signs of past or present life.
One test involved rapidly heating soil samples so they vapourised, leaving trace molecules to be analysed by spectrometers. 
No biological materials were found and NASA abandoned ground exploration of Mars for more than 20 years.
But Dr Rafael Navarro-Gonz&aacute;lez, a researcher with the National Autonomous University of Mexico, and colleagues have another explanation for the Viking results.
Writing in the latest issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, they say the experiment could have missed low levels of biological activity.
The researchers built their theory on studies conducted with Viking-type instruments in some of Earth's harshest environments: the Antarctic Dry Valleys, the Atacama Desert of Chile and Peru, and deserts in Libya. 
Soil samples in those locations contain trace amounts of materials that Viking would have missed.
Despite inhospitable conditions, soil samples from many of the team's test sites showed signs of life.
In 2004, the Mars rover Opportunity discovered an iron-rich mineral called jarosite on the surface of Mars, points out Navarro-Gonz&aacute;lez. The same mineral is known to exist in Spain's river Rio Tinto.
"So I decided to collect sediments from this river, which has a very acidic pH ... high levels of iron and yet the presence of microorganisms from the three domains of life," he says.
The team also discovered that iron-rich soils could oxidise organic molecules into carbon dioxide, further reducing the amount of material left behind. 
This finding also might explain the high levels of carbon dioxide the Viking instruments measured in the Martian soil, say the researchers.
"The Martian surface could have several orders of magnitude more organics than the stated Viking detection limit," the authors write.
While most scientists believed Viking's findings to be clear-cut, others were not convinced.
Dr Gilbert Levin, one of the mission's lead scientists, has long maintained that his life-detection experiment found living microorganisms in the soil of Mars.
Researchers now also believe that the best place to look for signs of life is underground, which is more protected from solar radiation.
NASA's current approach to Mars exploration is to look for signs of past and present-day water, which is believed to be necessary to support life. 
Over the past 10 years, NASA has dispatched a series of increasingly sophisticated probes to Mars to survey minerals and geological formations from above the planet's surface, and to analyse soil and rock chemistry with rovers on the ground.
"We suggest that the design of future organic instruments for Mars should include other methods to be able to detect extinct and/or extant life," the authors conclude.
NASA's next two landers, the 2007 Phoenix mission and the 2009 Mars Science Laboratory, both include instruments to analyse soil samples for water, carbon dioxide and organic materials.
Europe's ExoMars mission, slated for launch in 2011 or 2013, is designed to characterise the biological environment on Mars.

Cloning a mammoth was one of Professor Hwang Woo-suk's sideline projects. But who do you call when you need tissue samples?
Disgraced South Korean stem cell scientist Professor Hwang Woo-suk says he spent private donations for research to pay the Russian mafia for mammoth tissues to clone extinct species.
Hwang, once celebrated as a national hero, was indicted in May on charges of fraud and embezzlement after prosecutors said he was the mastermind of a scheme to make it look like his team had produced stem cells through cloning human embryos. 
He previously told a Seoul court that he spent part of more than US$1 million in corporate donations for "peripheral activities related to research". 
"Some of the money was spent in contacting the Russia mafia as we tried to clone mammoths," Hwang told the court during a hearing this week.
"But you can't say that [on the expense claim] so we expensed it as money for cows for experiment."
Hwang previously said he obtained mammoth tissues from glaciers and tried to clone them three times but failed. 
Prosecutors have charged Hwang with fraud to secure funds and misusing US$2.9 million in state funds and private donations as well as violating bioethics laws in procuring human eggs for research. 
An investigation panel at Seoul National University, where Hwang once worked, said his team fabricated key data in the two papers on embryonic stem cells that were once heralded. 
Misuse of state funds carries a penalty of up to 10 years in jail, while violating the bioethics laws can lead to three years' imprisonment, prosecutors say.
Hwang denied any of the funds were used for anything other than research. He described extra expenses incurred when trying to secure animal ovaries in addition to paying for junior researchers' housing and travel. 
"Do you know how hard it is to secure four or five animal ovaries at butcher shops? You need to keep the workers there happy," he says.

Surgeons may perform a full face transplant within months
The world's first full face transplant, which was authorised by a UK medical watchdog this week, is hedged with technical, psychological and ethical challenges, experts say. 
The green light given to surgeon Mr Peter Butler by the ethics committee at London's Royal Free Hospital opens the way to an operation that could take place within months.
But the decision was reached cautiously, reflecting an agonising debate about safety.
These fears were only eased after French doctors last November carried out the first partial face transplant and in July pronounced it a success. 
These are the main challenges from a full facial graft, say experts: 
Surgery
Nerves and the main vessels that carry blood to the face are connected by surgery under a microscope. 
This task is common in reconstructive surgery and has a high success rate. Of the 24 hand transplants that have been carried out on 18 people over the past eight years, only two have failed. 
But microsurgery also carries a 5-10% risk of transplant failure from clots that may form within the connected blood vessels in the first few days after surgery.
Immunosupressors
These powerful drugs inhibit the immune system so that the transplanted tissue is not attacked by the body's defences. But they also make the body more vulnerable to infection and disease. 
In addition, heavy use of immunosuppressors boosts the risk of cancer. The danger of life-threatening diseases poses an ethical problem because before the transplant, the recipient was generally healthy. 
To counter the immunosuppressor problem, doctors may give the graft recipient tiny doses of material from the donor so that his or her immune system becomes accustomed to the tissue and therefore stops attacking it. 
The technique is still experimental but has had promising results with kidney transplant patients.
Doctors who performed the partial face transplant on Isabelle Dinoire, 38, last November also gave her a bone marrow graft from the donor. 
Psychological
Selecting the patient with the right profile is one of the hardest tasks of all. 
The face is the mark of one's identity, so wearing someone else's face, or seeing someone else with the face of a deceased relative, for instance, may be deeply disturbing for some.
But the operation is new, which means no-one really knows for sure how it will work. 
On the positive side, computer modelling suggests facial tissue looks quite different and may be even unidentifiable when attached to someone else because the underlying bones and muscles fill it out differently. 
"Every graft of a visible organ leads to an identity split, the consequences of which can be very serious if the recipient does not succeed in psychologically accepting the organ and in rebuilding its social expression in everyday life," French experts wrote in The Lancet in July.
The right candidate is therefore someone who is robust and does not entertain the belief that the operation will miraculously restore their former lives, a hope that fades to bitterness and alienation when complications inevitably occur. 
Seen as 'alien'
In the case of the world's first hand transplant, recipient Clint Hallam begged to have the new limb cut off because he viewed it as alien. 
"Thorough psychological preparation is vital to the successful selection of patients," says The Face Trust, a charity set up to fund research for surgical reconstruction and face transplants.
"The challenge we face is that the people who cope least well with facial injury may also be the [people who] cope least well with facial transplantation  and its long-term impact on lifestyle."

Sequencing the honey bee genome could improve the search for genes linked to social behaviour
Scientists have unravelled the genetic code of the honey bee, uncovering clues about its complex social behaviour, heightened sense of smell and African origins. 
The results, published in the journal Nature, makes the bee the third insect to have its genome mapped and joins the fruit fly and mosquito in the exclusive club. 
The honey bee, or Apis mellifera, evolved more slowly than the other insects but has more genes related to smell. 
"In biology and biomedicine, honey bees are used to study many diverse areas, including allergic disease, development, gerontology, neuroscience, social behaviour and venom toxicology," says Professor Gene Robinson, director of the University of Illinois and one of the leaders of the project.
"The honey bee genome project is ushering in a bright era of bee research for the benefit of agriculture, biological research and human health," he adds. 
With its highly evolved social structure of tens of thousands of worker bees commanded by the queen, the honey bee genome could also improve the search for genes linked to social behaviour. 
But the consortium of scientists, which includes Australians, says a comprehensive analysis of the honey bee and other species will be needed to understand its social life.
The queen lives 10 times as long as workers and lays up to 2000 eggs a day. Despite having tiny brains, honey bees display honed cognitive abilities and learn to associate a flower's colour, shape and scent with food, which increases its foraging ability. 
The scientists who analysed the genetic code have discovered the honey bee originated in Africa and spread to Europe in two ancient migrations. 
"The African bees' spread throughout the New World is a spectacular example of biological invasion," the scientists write. 
The number of genes in honey bees related to smell outnumber those linked to taste. The insects also have fewer genes than the fruit fly or mosquito for immunity. 
Honey bees use pheromones, substances secreted by glands, to distinguish the gender, caste and age of other bees, according to the scientists. 
"This DNA sequence is a major step towards answering a basic question of social evolution. At the genomic level, what does it take to engineer an advanced colonial insect?" says Professor Edward Wilson, of Harvard University in a commentary on the research.

Researchers say their system of injecting ethanol into the engine saves petrol and costs consumers less than a hybrid car
Injecting small quantities of ethanol into car engines at moments of peak demand could improve fuel economy, US scientists say.
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) say a little squirt into the engine when the car is accelerating sharply or climbing a steep hill could improve fuel economy by 20-30%.
The researchers say such as system would allow carmakers to use smaller engines in their vehicles.
They say this would reduce weight and improve fuel economy at a lower cost to consumers than by adding a hybrid engine.
"To have a big impact on reducing oil consumption, one needs a low-cost way of improving efficiency, so a lot of people buy the car," says Dr Daniel Cohn, senior research scientist at MIT
He estimates that adding the ethanol injection system to a car would cost about US$1000 (A$1300) and that cars using the new system could be in mass production by 2011. 
"We view it as a very important near-term way to reduce oil consumption," Cohn says. 
The scientists say their system would only use small amounts of ethanol. And Cohn estimates the ethanol tank in cars using the technology would need to be refilled every three months or so. 
A turbocharger is added to produce more power. The ethanol injection system with the turbocharger would give a driver more power than a conventional engine of the same size, the scientists say.
How about 'knock'?
The higher pressures and temperatures of a turbocharged engine can lead to a problem known as knock, which occurs when the fuel and air in the engine explode prematurely, hurting performance and potentially damaging the engine. 
Cohn says his group's technology avoids that problem by injecting ethanol into the engine when knock is likely to occur.
The ethanol vaporises and cools the fuel-air mixture, keeping it from exploding until the engine is ready. 
"This is a very special feature of ethanol," Cohn says.
The researchers are developing and testing their system with car manufacturer Ford.

Today, the Amazon flows into the Atlantic Ocean. But millions of years ago, it flowed in the opposite direction
Even the most reliable geographical facts, like the direction of the world's largest river, can change dramatically over geological time. 
Millions of years ago, a new study suggests, the Amazon River flowed from east to west, rather than the current eastward path to the Atlantic Ocean. 
The evidence for this continent-wide reversal comes from tiny, dark, virtually indestructible minerals called zircons that are perpetually recycled in the sandstones of the Amazon Basin. 
"People use the zircons in ancient sands to reconstruct continents, to understand what might have been upstream," says geologist Russell Mapes, a doctoral candidate at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill. 
Very often zircons are the only mineral remnants of long-gone mountain ranges. 
Geologists know this thanks to new technology that measures the age of the minerals by the minute quantities of uranium and lead isotopes within them. The isotopes reveal how long it has been since the zircon solidified from molten rock. 
In the case of the Amazon zircons, Mapes with his US and Brazilian colleagues, discovered that the minerals don't come from the relatively young Andes at all.
Instead, they are 1.3 to 2.1 billion years old. That strongly suggests the zircons must have eroded out of some mountain range that bordered eastern South America back when it was still attached to Africa, before there was an Atlantic Ocean at all.
Yet the zircons were found to the west of the region where they were born, so the river must have once flowed in that direction, the researchers conclude.
"The rocks we saw on the river suggested this," says Mapes. "But when I got the actual data back, I was happy."
Ages later, about 65 million years ago, the Andes began to rise on the western edge of South America, blocking the river's passage to the Pacific and shifting its flow to the east. Today the zircon is all that remains of the South American-African Mountains. 
Mapes is due to present the discovery this week at the meeting of the Geological Society of America in Philadelphia.
"You couldn't tell this without this new tool," says geologist Dr Paul Link of Idaho State University, referring to the technology to sample individual layers of zircon minerals with precision, and then count the isotope atoms to gauge age. 
Link is working on a similar drainage reversal in North America, even further back in time. 
"I think that what it illustrates is that when a new tool is developed, then all of a sudden you can make interesting conclusions about which way rivers drained," he says. 
That, in turn, can reveal how very different the world once was.
"Even things like huge rivers are very temporary in the scheme of Earth time," says Mapes.

Mastodon's faught hormonally charged battles at certain times of the year
Battle scars on male mastodon tusks show these Ice Age giants were not the peaceful creatures once thought, according to new findings. 
The scars reveal they fought in brutal combat each year during seasonal phases of heightened sexual activity and aggression.
The discovery, announced at a recent Society of Vertebrate Paleontology meeting in Ontario, counters the view that now-extinct mastodons were peaceful, passive creatures that rarely engaged in battles.
It also strengthens the link between mastodon and modern elephant behaviour, since male bull elephants also fight seasonal, hormonally-charged battles to show their dominance and win desired mates.
Like warriors with different weapons, however, the two animals had distinct fighting techniques, says lead author Professor Daniel Fisher, a University of Michigan palaeontologist.
"Mastodon tusks curve upward strongly at the tips and appear to have been used in a vigorous up-thrusting motion," says Fisher.
Elephant tusks are less curved and therefore tend to be used more "in a straight thrusting move", he adds.
Fisher's analysis of mastodon tusks and skulls reveals that such ramming caused the lower part of the tusk to rotate backward, "crunching it against the back wall of the tusk socket".
He found that although the tusk continued to grow by adding layers of ivory to its base, pitted scars line up along the outside curve of the tusk base.
"It's not just one event, but a whole series of events that is preserved in this tusk record of fighting," he says.
Depends on the season
Using previous research about mastodon tusk growth patterns, Fisher also found the scars correspond to seasonal patterns, the pits formed each year of the adult male animal's life during mid-spring to early summer. 
Studies on mastodon vertebrae also helped fill out a picture of gory battles between the creatures, which were 2-3 metres tall.
"For example, we have evidence of tusks stabbing into the vertebral column, penetrating the space traversed by the spinal cord, from a direction that implies the victim was already lying on his side on the ground; in other words, the violence went on, even after one animal was down," Fisher says.
Other fossils suggest some of the animals were butchered in autumn, most likely by humans, who may have caused or contributed to the extinction of mastodons 11,000 years ago.
Few broken bones
Dr Jeffrey Saunders, curator and chair of geology at the Illinois State Museum, says he has excavated over 72 mastodons.
"I always viewed them as being rather passive animals because I never found many broken bones, maybe one or two broken ribs. But I greatly respect Dr Fisher's work and I continue to be open-minded about the possibilities," he says.
Saunders, who once found himself between two fighting bull male elephants while in a small jeep, adds, "I also think it's interesting that similarities between mastodons and modern elephants seem to persist, given that these animals parted evolutionary ways 40 million years ago. The basic elephant design must be successful to have persisted so long."

A Botai village, with its horse yards, would have looked like this
Evidence from soil inside the remains of a 5600-year-old horse yard indicates that the ancient Botai people of Kazakhstan were among the earliest to domesticate horses. 
But the Botai probably ate and milked their horses as often as they rode them. 
The horse yards are part of an archaeological site in northern Kazakhstan known as Krasnyi Yar.
This was once a large village occupied by the Copper Age Botai, says Dr Sandra Olsen, curator at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, who leads a team that has been investigating horse domestication for years.
Associate Professor Rosemary Capo, a geologist colleague from the University of Pittsburgh, presented some of the soil evidence for horses this week at a Geological Society of America meeting in Philadelphia. 
"We really don't understand any major signs of changes in horses with domestication," says Dr Melinda Zeder, an archaeologist at the Smithsonian Institution who specialises in the origins of animal and plant domestication. 
Zeder refers to physical changes in horse bones from ancient middens.
Nor, so far, is there a direct way to determine what people were doing with their horses that early on, she says.
For these reasons she and her colleagues have been building their case with less direct evidence.
"Here's an approach to documenting horse domestication that's extremely new," says Zeder, of the evidence presented at the conference. "Sort of like Perry Mason, they're building circumstantial evidence."
That evidence comes from circular arrangements of posts and the soil differences found inside and outside the horse yard.
Comparing soils
Inside the yard, the soil contained up to 10 times the phosphorus as outside soils, but lower concentrations of nitrogen. That's what you'd expect if the soil inside the yard was enriched with horse manure.
Modern horse manure, for comparison, is loaded with phosphorous, potassium and nitrogen. The nitrogen is the easiest to lose to groundwater or the air. 
Phosphorus, on the other hand, can be held in place by calcium and iron, says Capo, one of the scientists who analysed the soil.
"High phosphorous could also indicate human occupation," says Capo. "But that's usually accompanied by other geochemical signatures, which we didn't find in the [horse yard] samples." 
There was also high sodium concentration in the horse yard samples, which could be from urine, suggests Olsen.
Smoking gun
The real smoking gun, says Olsen, will be if they can detect long-lived molecules of fat in these samples that can be attributed specifically to horses. That analysis is now being arranged.
So what were the Botai doing with those horses?
Olsen says they probably ate them and used them as pack animals. They may also have milked the mares to create a vitamin-rich, mildly alcoholic beverage that's still consumed today in Kazakhstan.

Antechinus females go to extraordinary lengths to make sure their offspring survive
Some female marsupials have sex with as many males as possible to produce the fittest and healthiest offspring, Australian researchers report.
The brown antechinus (Antechinus stuartii) usually only breeds once in her life, so she has added pressure to make sure her young have the best chance of surviving.
Researchers report in today's issue of the journal Nature how the mouse-like marsupial stores the sperm of many suitors for up to two weeks in her ova ducts.
Sperm from the 'strongest' males then go on to fertilise her prized eggs. And the result may be up to eight healthy offspring sired from four strong males.
Dr Diana Fisher and colleagues from the Australian National University conducted two separate mating experiments.
In the first, they took female marsupials from the wild and when they were in season allowed them to mate either with a single male, or with three different males, every two days.
A year later they replicated the experiment, but kept lactating females in captivity until just before weaning.
This allowed the researchers to determine whether the previous benefit of polyandry depended on stressful conditions in their natural habitat, or could be replicated in the laboratory. 
They found the females in both populations weren't particularly fussy and, given the chance, mated happily with multiple partners.
The only males they avoided in the wild were those that were obviously picked on by other males; those perceived as 'weak'.
"By experimentally assigning mates to females, we were able to show that polyandry [females mating with more than one male during the mating season] greatly increases offspring survival," Fisher says.
"DNA profiling shows that males that gain high paternity under sperm competition sire offspring that are more viable."
While many females in the animal and plant world mate with multiple partners, researchers have been at a loss to explain why. After all, the practice can be costly in terms of egg production, disease and injury. 
Earlier studies suggested polyandry yielded genetic benefits and could increase offspring survival, but until now the reasons why were unclear and the same effects had yet to be proved for mammals in the wild.
The researchers conclude that the practice of polyandry leads to 'better quality' offspring, an important factor in light of the fact that the marsupial will usually breed only once in her lifetime.

Adverts that use thin models can make you reach for the biscuit tin
Young women obsessed with their own body image eat more food after looking at magazine adverts that feature the 'ideal' thin body, research shows.
But those with a healthier body image, who you might expect to be less influenced by the adverts, eat less.
The Australian study shows that advertising affects eating behaviour, just not necessarily the way we think.
The researchers publish their study in the November issue of the journal Eating Behaviors.
Fiona Monro, a PhD student at the University of New South Wales, tries to explain the results.
"We would expect people who value the way they look would be reminded by viewing the image and not eat," she says.
"We're not sure why we found the reverse but possibly because of stress.
"[Women obsessed with their appearance] see the idealised image and think about their own body so turn to food. They might think 'what's the point, I'm never going to look like that, I may as well eat' or the image makes them think they're thinner than they are so they eat more."
Two hours after their last meal Monro asked 68 female university students to rank the importance of physical attractiveness, health and physical fitness to determine whether they value the way their body looks more or less than the way it functions.
The researchers were interested in the notion of self-objectification, the way some people view themselves and their bodies as an object to be valued for external appearance.
The women's answers categorised women as low or high self-objectifiers, with high self-objectifiers valuing appearance more.
Participants then viewed six magazine advertisements for body-related products like diet pills, some containing images of idealised female models, some not.
Body-obsessed people (or high objectifiers) ate more food (sweet and savoury biscuits) and sweet biscuits, after viewing idealised body adverts than adverts without models.
Low objectifiers ate less food after seeing idealised images than the other adverts.
"There's no doubt these images have an effect on some women and can lead to changes in eating behaviour, especially when you consider how many images people are exposed to every day," Monro says.
She says in future eating disorders might be reduced by identifying high-objectifiers in schools, enabling education to change emphasis on appearance and promote a broader acceptance of body shapes.

This footprint was made by a two-legged dinosaur that walked along a sandy beach 165 million years ago
Scientists studying how emus walk have brought to life the mysterious moves of two-footed Jurassic dinosaurs travelling along a long-lost beach.
Computer models have been developed to simulate the gait, and therefore the possible tracks, of specific dinosaurs.
But live emus allow scientists to directly compare complex tracks to specific behaviours, say researchers looking at the thousands of tracks left behind 165 million years ago by dinosaurs at Red Gulch in northern Wyoming.
Among the surprises they've found is that tracks once interpreted as steady walking may actually be created by the animals stopping at mid-stride.
Another enigmatic type of track that now makes sense is where the dinosaurs appear to have crossed one leg over the other.
The motion is a seemingly weird thing to do, until you watch an emu making the same sort of track, says Brent Breithaupt, director and curator of the University of Wyoming's Geological Museum.
Emus, it turns out, have legs that are close together, like many dinosaurs, and tend to look around a lot as they walk, Breithaupt says.
This scanning behaviour causes emus to often cross the left foot over the right leg and the right foot over the left, making the same confusing pattern seen in the dinosaur tracks.
"Sure enough there are wonderful comparisons," says Breithaupt. "Emus are our biological Rosetta Stone."
He presented the latest on emus as proxies for dinosaurs at the recent Geological Society of America in Philadelphia.
The search for a modern animal to act as a proxy for dinosaur tracks started, says Breithaupt, because he was getting a little impatient with all the speculation about the tracks.
There was too much of what he calls "prehistoric hyperbole".
So after passing on ostriches, which have only two toes, and rheas, which have three-toes but overly rambunctious personalities, emus were the best alternative. Plus there was an emu ranch just across the state line in Colorado.
Breithaupt and his team now think that the Red Gulch dinosaurs were probably human-sized meat eaters, or theropods, travelling along in groups.
The groups may have included families, since there are juvenile and adults tracks together, implying some sort of parental care.
Exactly what the dinosaurs looked like, however, is a mystery because the mid-Jurassic Period is particularly poor in dinosaur fossils in North America.
"There is virtually nothing known about dinosaurs in North America from that time," says geologist Dr Erik Kvale, who discovered the tracks and did a great deal of the first geological work there.
"Chances are there were some very gregarious behaviours of dinosaurs [at Red Gulch], but it's only a snapshot."
What can be said with more certainty is that the dinosaurs were walking in a very different landscape than today, says Kvale.
The sands beneath their feet were carbonate sands like those found in the Bahamas or the Florida Keys, but the climate of the ancient shoreline was probably a lot drier.
"The Persian Gulf is a better analogue," says Kvale.

NASA is discussing whether a shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope is worth the risk
After all the time, money, anguish and work to return the space shuttle fleet to flight, the US space agency still has one lingering question to resolve. Can a shuttle mission be sent to save Hubble?
If not for the 2003 Columbia disaster, the fifth servicing call to the Hubble Space Telescope probably would have happened by now.
That mission would have left the 16-year-old observatory with fresh batteries, replacement gyroscopes for steering and two new science instruments.
Such upgrades could keep Hubble on the cutting edge of astronomical research, delving into questions such as the nature of the mysterious dark energy that seems to be driving the universe's expansion and what the universe looked like as its earliest structures emerged after the Big Bang.
But after the Columbia accident shuttle flights that do not go to the space station, where astronauts can seek shelter in case their ship is too damaged to fly home, were considered too risky and the Hubble house call was cancelled.
NASA looked into a robotic servicing mission instead, but found the cost and complexity of such a mission too daunting.
Meanwhile, public outrage over NASA's decision to let the popular space telescope fester, culminating in a pledge by the new head of NASA to re-consider flying one last flight to Hubble.
Now, with three post-Columbia flights complete, the time has come to decide Hubble's fate.
NASA is considering if the safety upgrades implemented after the accident offset the risk of flying with few options available to save a stranded shuttle crew.
"Hubble is definitely sort of the comeback kid, so hopefully it will be able to do it one more time," says Professor Adam Riess, an astronomer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore.
"I would expect that this is the final meeting," he adds. "Now it's a matter of coming up a with a decision."
Shuttle program workers have certainly done their homework.
The first order of business was to fix problems with debris falling off the ship's fuel tank during launch.
A chunk of insulating foam broke off Columbia's tank during lift-off and smashed a hole in the wing's heat shield.
As the shuttle attempted to return to Earth 16 days later, superheated atmospheric gases blasted into the breach, destroying the shuttle and killing the seven astronaut crew.
NASA's first tank redesign, tested during a July 2005 flight of shuttle Discovery, failed to prevent dangerously large pieces of foam from falling off the tank. A second redesign was tested a year later, and this time the tank was deemed safe enough to resume flights.
The shuttle program also demonstrated how the ship's robot arm and newly added extension boom could be used during flight to scrutinise the shuttle's heat shield for damages.
Astronauts also tested using the boom as a work platform in case repairs were needed to fix heat shield holes before attempting atmospheric re-entry.
Finally, engineers developed rudimental heat shield repair kits and techniques.
But there is no getting around the issue of flying without an orbital safe. Hubble's orbit is too far from the station for a shuttle to get there.
Theoretically, NASA could severely cut shuttle power and keep a crew in orbit for several weeks until another shuttle could be launched on a rescue mission. But there is no guarantee the flight could be launched on time or that another problem might not also strike the rescue ship.
"You just don't have the orbital lifetime on a Hubble mission to be able to get another vehicle launched," says deputy shuttle program manager John Shannon.
"We're going to have to go into the Hubble decision not counting on the launch-on-need vehicle," he says.
"That's the difficult question the agency's going to have. Do we have enough confidence in the [tank] design? Do we have enough confidence in our inspection and repair to be able to do that? I think that's where the discussion is mostly going to lie."
Another issue is whether to risk a shuttle and crew on a Hubble flight when NASA is under a strict deadline to finish the space station before 2010 when the shuttles are to be retired.
The agency needs at least 14 more construction missions and wants two additional flights beyond that to deliver heavy equipment and spare parts to the outpost.
In a recently released flight schedule, agency managers set aside a Hubble servicing mission for April 2008.
Station assembly, which resumed with last month's flight of shuttle Atlantis, would be complete in July 2010 under the new manifest.
Without a servicing mission, astronomers expect Hubble to last only another two or three years before its batteries give out. Even before then, the finicky gyroscopes could break or the cameras could fail.
"It would really be a blow," says astronomer Dr Harry Ferguson, also with the Space Telescope Science Institute. "I think everyone is really quite hopeful that [a repair mission] will happen. We're waiting with bated breath."
If it gets upgrades, Hubble should last until at least 2013. That means it could still be operational when its sharp-eyed infrared replacement, the James Webb Space Telescope, arrives in orbit to begin its five-year mission.
The Webb observatory, which is not designed for servicing by astronauts, is scheduled for launch in June 2013.

Industrial aerosols don't just affect air quality but also the temperature of our oceans
A projected drop in air pollution will affect global ocean currents and could cause a marked rise in water temperature in the southern hemisphere, the author of a new study says.
Dr Wenju Cai and colleagues from CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research are the first to model the impact of changing levels of particulate air pollution, or aerosols, on ocean currents.
They publish their findings in the journal Geophysical Research Letters.
Cai says air pollution like sulfate, organic particles and black carbon produced from fossil fuel burning, transport emissions and power plants, has increased rapidly over the past 50 years.
But tighter regulation and a worldwide move towards cleaner fuels means some projections have aerosols dropping to pre-1960 levels by around 2050, Cai says.
This, however, has a downside. Less air pollution means sunlight can more easily reach Earth, which many researchers say could mean higher temperatures.
Cai says rises in surface and water temperature could also cause a slowdown in the so-called worldwide conveyor belt, an ocean circulation system that transports heat from southern hemisphere oceans to those in the north.
So cleaner air will result in colder northern hemisphere temperatures and warmer waters in the south, Cai says.
"That will have a big impact in Europe and the northern hemisphere because the conveyor belt is sending heat to that part of the globe," he says.
"In the southern hemisphere ... we will get warmer faster and the rise in sea levels will accelerate."
Cai says warming will be most rapid in the Tasman Sea, which could heat up by 4&#176;C by 2100, with major implications for marine life and ecosystems.
How do aerosols influence ocean currents?
Aerosols keep the Earth cool by reflecting away solar radiation, says Cai's co-author and CSIRO colleague Dr John Church. So, they are thought to mask some of the effects of global warming.
But because industrial development has produced a higher concentration of aerosols in the northern hemisphere than the south, in the past the cooling effect has been more marked in the north.
Cooler northern hemisphere temperatures should mean cooler northern oceans, and cooler waters should equate with lower sea levels.
This wasn't the case, says Church. Instead, the study found evidence that the cooling waters had intensified movement of the conveyer belt, speeding up delivery of heat from south to north.
Reversal
The situation may reverse once aerosol levels fall, Cai says, effectively causing a slow-down in the transport of heat from the southern hemisphere to the north.
Cai says an exaggerated version of this scenario was the basis for the Hollywood movie The Day After Tomorrow, in which a change in ocean currents produces a new ice age.
Church says it's unclear exactly how dropping aerosol levels will affect global temperatures when combined with rising temperatures associated with the greenhouse effect.
"We don't understand the aerosol forcing as well as greenhouse, so there's a question of how much of the global warming is compensated by aerosols," he says.
"If it's a small amount, as we reduce the aerosols in the atmosphere there won't be a rapid acceleration of climate change, but if they're actually masking a very large amount then as we reduce the aerosols that has big implications."

Australia is developing the world's first koala sperm bank
Zoos around the world will soon be able to breed their own koalas without having to fly in breeding stock from Australia, researchers say.
They say new technology to preserve sperm will allow koala sperm to be exported from Australia for the first time.
University of Queensland reproductive biologist and team leader Dr Steve Johnston says the researchers have been able to extend the shelf life of the sperm to 40 hours.
They've done this by diluting the semen in a special pH balanced solution containing nutrients and antibiotics, and keeping it chilled.
The team this week unveiled eight koala joeys born from artificial insemination with the diluted semen.
Being able to dilute the semen is the first step in being able to provide frozen specimens internationally and interstate, Johnston says.
This is because fresh koala semen only lasts a couple of hours and the fragility of the cells means they don't easily survive freezing and thawing.
The team now plans to set up the world's first koala sperm bank.
What do koalas and camels have in common?
Johnston says koalas, like camels, have a special factor in their sperm which triggers ovulation in the female. 
"What we found was ... there's a combination between the mating itself and the factor in the semen which causes the [brain] to release luteinising hormone, which results in the ovulation process," he says.
Diluting the semen without affecting the ovulation factor was a major challenge for researchers, he says.
"Diluting is a first step because if you're going to freeze something you have to put it into a diluent which allows you to put cryoprotectants in the fluid to protect the sperm against freezing," he says.
"The other thing is when you dilute the sperm you don't have to use as much, you don't waste as much sperm when inseminating."
Low sperm count
Koalas have a relatively low sperm count with only about 100 million sperm per ejaculation, compared with echidnas, which have 10 times that amount.
Johnston says being able to send a frozen sperm sample internationally will make it easier to introduce genetic diversity to koala populations.
And setting up a sperm bank will help conservation efforts in Australia and enable samples to be screened for common koala diseases like chlamydia and retroviruses.
But don't hold your breath about buying your very own koala sperm online, Johnston says.
"The Queensland government is making sure that none of that will happen."

Mathematicians say you can have your cake and eat it too, if you're prepared to do the sums
Mathematicians have devised a fairer way to share a cake, according to new research.
It allows you to choose a slice with more chocolate icing. But the trade-off is that you get a smaller piece.
The research, which is based on the principle of surplus procedure, is published in the Notices of the American Mathematical Society.
The traditional way of dividing a cake is the 'cut and choose' approach, where one person cuts the cake in two and the other chooses a half, write Professor Michael Jones and colleagues from Montclair State University in New Jersey.
While this ensures both people get the same sized portion, it doesn't necessarily mean they are equally happy.
For example, one may like chocolate icing, sprinkles or cream more than the other.
Surplus procedure
To even this out, the researchers propose people tell a referee how much they value certain qualities of a cake.
The referee then uses these weighted values to calculate where to cut the cake.
In an ideal world, both parties would get 100% of what they want. But in reality there's a compromise.
Jones says his team's algorithms ensure that both parties get about 65% of what they want, based on the principle of giving each person at least 50% of the cake plus the surplus as they value it.
The catch is that the system depends on honesty and requires a referee and a calculator.
The surplus procedure system can be used for two or three people, Jones says, but doesn't work quite as well for three or more.
He says the method can also be applied to other heterogeneous and divisible items, like dividing land or deciding how much rent each flatmate pays.
The wedge system
Dr Burkard Polster, an Australian mathematician from Monash University, isn't convinced the proposed method is best.
"How do you associate a number with something like happiness?" he says.
"If you really wanted to sell this to a 10 year old, they wouldn't go for it, They'd still think the other piece is better."
He says a square cake, for example, can be cut into five fairly by using the equation that says the area of a triangle equals the length of its base times its height, divided by two.
The cake can't be cut into equal squares because there will only be four pieces. And it can't be cut into parallel pieces because the pieces on the edge will have more icing (if the cake is iced around the edge and not just on top).
The answer is to cut the cake in equally sized wedges.
"If the cake has a perimeter of 50 centimetres, you start at one corner and measure 10 centimetres and make a mark, then you go around until you're back to the beginning and you have five marks.
"From those marks you cut through the middle and those wedges will be exactly one fifth."
Eggs and sandwiches
Polster says applying surplus procedure to cakes isn't the first time maths has been used to share food.
The 'egg yolk' theory describes how best to divide a fried egg into pieces with an equal portion of yolk and white.
And he says the 'ham sandwich' theory makes sure you can cut a sandwich and get equal amounts of ham, lettuce and bread.

A vending machine containing a new type of printer could churn out a novel in an instant
An innovative printer head may lead to affordable printers that spew out a thousand pages per minute, its developers say.
Such printers could lead to fast, high-quality photo printing as well as on-demand printed media, say the researchers.
Imagine customised newspapers and magazine and instant books printed by a vending machine.
"Think of such a machine in an airport terminal. You slide your credit card, chose a [book] for your flight, and get it warm from the printer in less than a minute," says Dr Moshe Einat, senior lecturer at the College of Judea and Samaria in Ariel, Israel, and team member.
The JeTrix printer head, invented by colleague Nissim Einat and team, could be on the market in two years in printers costing U$500-U$1000, the researchers say.
The machine could reduce backups at the office printer too.
Today, even the best printers used for business purposes cost thousands of dollars and max out at about 50 pages per minute.
The speed is limited, in part, by the printer head. For starters, it's usually much smaller than the page and takes time to scan back and forth while applying the ink.
Nozzle redesign
The other challenge has to do with the nozzles.
The ink is typically pooled in a main reservoir and distributed through a chamber, or manifold, that has many branching tubes, each leading to a nozzle.
To get uniform drops, the pressure of the ink in this system must be precisely regulated and maintained, a delicate task that becomes more difficult as the number of nozzles and the size of the nozzle array increases.
Overcoming obstacles
The JeTrix overcomes conventional limitations in two ways. First, it does not have a main reservoir or manifold that requires delicate pressure maintenance. Second, it is not limited by size. In fact, it can be as large as piece of paper and theoretically has a nozzle for every pixel.
The difference has to do with the way Einat and his team built the printer head. They turned to the same technology used to manufacture computer chips, etching the printer head out of silicon wafer chips.
Instead of a small array of nozzles that makes many scans to print a page, the design is a flat, 2D panel designed to be as big as the page and eject all of the necessary ink simultaneously.
Although the approach has a number of innovative features, it also has limitations says Dr Ross Allen, an internationally recognised technologist based in St Helena, California, who has 40 patents in imaging and printing technology.
"Inkjet print heads typically make two to eight passes over the same pixel row in order to hide any defects caused by nozzles that don't operate or meet drop ejection specifications," says Allen.
"If Einat's print head lays down all of the ink at once, the printed page could show artefacts or flaws from 'bad' nozzles."
Printing in colour
Printing in colour could also present a challenge.
"You'll need black, cyan, magenta and yellow page-size print heads printing in precise registration," says Allen.
Finally, he says, no matter how fast a printer head applies ink, it doesn't get around the basic limitation that the ink must dry before the page is stacked in the paper tray.

Who's that? Oh, it's me
When presented with a jumbo-sized mirror, elephants recognise their reflections and investigate the inside of their mouths and ears, according to a new study.
Such self-awareness is rare. Until the paper, published online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, scientists believed only humans, apes and dolphins possessed self-recognition skills.
All these animals are highly intelligent and seem to feel empathy, a quality that is probably linked to self-awareness.
"What they have in common is complex sociality that includes high levels of cooperation, altruism and large brains," says co-author Dr Frans de Waal, a psychology professor at Emory University in Atlanta.
"In literature about human children, there is speculation as to how increased self-awareness makes it possible to set the self apart from others, which in turn permits the self to take the other's perspective, a prerequisite for complex forms of empathy," says de Waal, director of the Living Links Center at the university's Yerkes National Primate Research Center.
For the study, de Waal and colleagues Dr Diana Reiss and Joshua Plotnik introduced three adult female Asian elephants - Happy, Patty and Maxine - to a large mirror placed in their exhibit at the Bronx Zoo in New York City.
According to the paper, animals typically have a social response towards the reflection they see in the mirror. They then try to inspect the mirror, such as by looking behind it. Most animals, such as parrots, dogs and cats, show these behaviours.
But the three elephants had different reactions to their reflections. Each elephant played a sort of peek-a-boo by swaying their heads, trunks and bodies in and out of mirror view. They even brought food in front of the mirror and watched themselves eat.
Maxine took her trunk and stuck it in her mouth, as though she were investigating the inside of her oral cavity. She also used her trunk to pull her ear slowly forward towards the mirror.
X marks the spot
The researchers next painted two X marks on the foreheads of the elephants. One mark was invisible to control for odour and tactile cues, the other fully visible.
This 'mark test' is the scientific standard for determining whether an animal recognises itself in a mirror.
As soon as Happy saw the visible mark, she touched it with her trunk in front of the mirror. She did this 47 times. Maxine and Patty, however, ignored the marks on their foreheads.
"We believe that because elephants love to dust-bathe and throw food and dirt on their backs for storage, such a relatively small mark on their head might not bother them," says Plotnik.
"Chimpanzees and humans groom themselves by picking things off their bodies, while elephants love to be covered in dirt and mud."
Hardly surprising
Dr Lori Marino, a senior lecturer in neuroscience and behavioural biology at Emory, worked on the earlier dolphin-mirror study. 
She is not surprised that elephants can recognise themselves in the mirror.
"Like dolphins, great apes and humans, elephant brains are large and highly convoluted and their social lives are extraordinarily complex," Marino says.
She adds that many other animals possess self-awareness, a multi-faceted, complex phenomenon, which seems to manifest itself at different levels.
Since elephant self-awareness and empathy are on a similar level to that of humans, Plotnik hopes the findings will strengthen our commitment towards conservation, especially as the wild elephant population continues to plummet due to habitat loss and poaching.

A shuttle mission in 2008 will be the Hubble Space Telescope's final service call
The US space agency says it will launch a final space shuttle mission to keep the ageing Hubble Space Telescope in orbit and operational. 
The decision, announced this week by NASA chief Dr Michael Griffin, follows a review of safety concerns and appeals from the scientific community to extend Hubble's life. 
Without a repair mission, which will probably be carried out in 2008, the telescope would shut down in 2009 or even earlier. 
Since it was launched into orbit 16 years ago, the telescope has helped astrophysicists peer deep into the universe, free of the distortions from the Earth's atmosphere.
Orbiting 575 kilometres above the Earth, the Hubble has enabled scientists to better measure the age and origins of the universe, observe distant supernovas, and identify and study bodies in and outside the solar system. 
In 2004, it conveyed pictures of the most distant parts of the universe ever observed by visible light, "the deepest portrait of the visible universe ever achieved by humankind", says the Space Telescope Science Institute. 
NASA had scheduled a mission for Hubble in 2003, but scrapped it after the Columbia shuttle disintegrated while returning to Earth. 
The accident raised serious safety questions for NASA, particularly with the shuttle's heat shield.
This week's announcement comes after two of the last three shuttle missions were judged a success.
Safety review
Griffin says the decision to go ahead was taken after a painstaking review of safety issues.
"We're not going to risk a crew in order to do a Hubble mission," he told staff at the Goddard Space Center.
NASA has said previously it was ready to refurbish the telescope as long as the mission did not put the space shuttle crew in jeopardy. 
The Hubble mission presents a challenge because the shuttle crew would not be able to seek refuge aboard the orbiting International Space Station if a serious problem arose.
NASA also is faced with a busy schedule of another 15 missions to finish building the space station before retiring the entire shuttle program in 2010, or four missions a year. 
A Hubble mission would probably be set for early 2008 and would require a second shuttle to be ready for any rescue mission should the crew face an emergency. 
A new mission to the Hubble would replace the telescope's six stabilising gyroscopes and its batteries to extend its life. 
Astronauts would also repair an infrared spectrometer that has been broken since 2004.
They would also install two new instruments, including the Wide Field Camera 3 that would enhance images of dark matter and of the first galaxies that were formed after the Big Bang.

Putting babies to sleep on their backs allows them to respond to their arousal reflexes
An abnormality in part of the brain that controls breathing, arousal and other reflexes may be what causes sudden infant death syndrome, a finding that could lead to a preventive treatment, a study says.
The discovery could explain why babies lying face down are more likely to die of SIDS.
In that position an infant's reflexes, including head turning and arousal, are harder to trigger when breathing is challenged, says the report from Children's Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical School.
The study, published in this week's Journal of the American Medical Association,  was based on autopsy data from 31 infants who had died from SIDS and 10 who had died from other causes between 1997 and 2005 in California.
In the SIDS infants, a look at the lowest part of the brainstem, the medulla oblongata, found abnormalities in nerve cells that make and use serotonin, one of the chemicals in the brain that transmit messages between nerve cells. 
Serotonin and how it is processed in the brainstem may help coordinate breathing, blood pressure, sensitivity to carbon dioxide and temperature, the report says.
When babies sleep face down or have their faces covered by bedding, they are thought to breathe exhaled carbon dioxide back in, depriving them of oxygen.
When that happens the carbon dioxide increase would normally trigger nerve cells in the brainstem, which in turn stimulate respiratory and arousal centres in the brain. 
"A normal baby will wake up, turn over, and start breathing faster when carbon dioxide levels rise," says Dr Hannah Kinney of the Boston hospital, an author of the paper. 
But babies with the defect die because the reflexes are impaired, she says. 
Public health campaigns aimed at reducing the risk of SIDS have advised parents to put infants to sleep on their back, and to avoid soft bedding, sharing a bed with an infant, smoking during pregnancy and smoking around a baby after birth.
Among the SIDS infants in the new study, 65% were sleeping prone or on their side at the time of death, indicating a need for continued public information on the problem, the study says. 
The findings may spur development of a diagnostic test to identify infants at risk, or perhaps some day a drug or other type of treatment to protect infants with abnormal brainstem serotonin systems, the authors say. 
"This finding lends credence to the view that SIDS risk may greatly increase when an underlying predisposition combines with an environmental risk, such as sleeping face down, at a developmentally sensitive time in early life," says Dr Duane Alexander, director of the US National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, which helped to pay for the study.

'Serious games' are being developed to teach the US military how to defuse tense situations in Iraq
Gamers are increasingly dropping virtual swords and guns, and picking up serious subjects such as cancer or the Iraq war, injecting a dose of reality into the multi-billion dollar sector.
A two-day Serious Games Summit near Washington saw some 500 game designers, publishers, academic experts as well as representatives from the defence and health sectors share information about new 'serious games' on the market that deal with real-world issues. 
"Serious games are games used for some other serious pursuit than entertainment," says Ben Sawyer, co-director of the Serious Games Initiative, which held its first summit two years ago.
Among games featured at the summit were The Redistricting Game, which teaches administrators how legislative redistricting works; HumanSim, which tests medical diagnostic skills; and Tactical Iraqi, a program to train US soldiers with linguistic and cultural skills needed for missions in Iraq. 
That game, largely funded by the US Department of Defense, encourages soldiers who face various scenarios with virtual Iraqis to use diplomacy to avoid or defuse tense situations. Players are also familiarised with basic Iraqi culture.
In one episode, for example, two soldiers seeking information from local Iraqis sitting in a cafe are shown how to introduce themselves to make clear they are not a threat and are told to take off their sunglasses as eye contact is important in Iraqi culture. 
"Clearly, in hindsight, a lot of this training should have been done earlier, but the military recognises it now, and is serious about it now, and I see this as being a permanent change in the military," say Lewis Johnson, chief executive officer of Tactical Language and Culture, a California-based company that developed the game.
"At this point the US military is really taking the lead in emphasising the importance of understanding other cultures, other languages, the importance of communication," he adds.
Johnson says a number of countries have expressed interest in his company's products, which include Tactical Pashto and Tactical French for soldiers or civilian contractors working in Afghanistan or in French-speaking African countries. 
He says the company is also seeking to develop games for the general public and to be used in schools.
Johnson, Sawyer and others attending the summit say they believe the serious games sector will gain popularity in coming years as more funding becomes available and as the Super Mario generation comes of age. 
"Serious games has got very far to go, but in a good way that is nowhere but up," Sawyer says.
"As we start to unlock where we can use games and where they can be successful, and as commercial gaming hurdles forward and we can gain by trailblazing technology they churn out, the things we will be able to do two to three years from now will be more amazing." 
Sawyer says he expects the next big success story to be a serious game being developed to enable students to design their own game on a certain topic.
"Instead of writing a term paper, you might design a game about running a state park, owning a hotel or running an office," he says.

The traffic lights don't need a master controller to 'tell' them when to change
A network of traffic lights that decides to turn green when lots of cars are waiting can help reduce traffic jams, say researchers.
Unlike other traffic light systems that are coordinated centrally, these lights would optimise traffic flow by acting autonomously.
Seung-Bae Cools of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel in Belgium and colleagues report their findings in a paper posted on the arXiv  preprint website.
Traffic management aims to optimise traffic flow, reduce traffic jams and cut the time drivers spend waiting at traffic lights.
Green lights are synchronised into 'green waves' to allow cars to flow through the main avenues of cities without facing a red light.
The idea is to make the speed of the green wave match the desired cruise speed for the street.
But if the green waves remain the same whatever the traffic condition, this can lead to traffic problems.
When traffic is heavy, cars entering a green wave will stop as there are cars ahead of them. And once a car misses the green wave it has to wait the whole duration of the red light to enter the next green wave. 
Self-organising traffic lights
Most advanced traffic control management systems rely on a central computer to help optimise the flow of traffic.
But the Belgian researchers have developed a system that relies on "self-organising traffic lights".
They say the system relies purely on "local interactions between cars and traffic lights" to generate "flexible green waves on demand".
At each traffic light, there is a counter that is set to zero each time a light turns red and then counts the number of cars that build up at the lights.
"If there are more cars approaching or waiting behind a red light, this will turn into green faster than if there are only few cars," say the researchers.
The researchers say the system can greatly improve traffic flow and they have tested this by feeding real traffic data from a Brussels avenue into a traffic simulator.
Adapting to traffic conditions
But Brent Stafford of Intelligent Transport Systems Australia is not convinced the system does better than the latest 'adaptive' traffic light systems.
As the name suggests, adaptive systems adjust to current traffic conditions, rather than say trigger green lights set on a timer.
One existing adaptive system, developed in Australia in the 1970s, is the Sydney Co-ordinated Adaptive Traffic System (SCATS) that now controls about 60,000 intersections in 40 countries around the world, says Stafford.
He says the Belgian researchers compared their system to a less sophisticated system to this and he is not sure how realistic the traffic simulator they used was since it is non-standard.
Panacea for traffic jams?
And other experts warn against thinking such technology can be a panacea for traffic jams.
"At the end of the day you will not be able to resolve traffic jams using just this particular concept," says traffic control engineer Professor Ljubo Vlacic of Australia's Griffith University.
The Belgian researchers agree, saying efficient traffic control should not be an excuse to keep increasing the number of cars on our roads.
They stress alternatives to private cars such as cycling, walking, car sharing and public transport play an essential role.

The red wine molecule seems to mimic the benefits of eating less without the effort of dieting. But will it work in humans?
A compound in red wine and grapes can extend the life span of obese mice and help them enjoy a healthier old age, scientists say. 
The molecule known as resveratrol not only enabled the mice to live longer than other overweight rodents, it also reduced the negative health effects of eating a high-calorie diet. 
Resveratrol has been shown to have same effect in studies on yeast, flies and worms. But the scientists say their research is the first to show it works in mammals.
"It is possible to find a molecule that activates the body's natural defences against ageing. You can use it to enhance the health of a mouse or mammal. That is unprecedented," says Associate Professor David Sinclair, of Harvard Medical School. 
He adds that the study, reported online today in the journal Nature, is proof of the principle that it works in mammals.
But the real test will be to develop formulations or find other molecules to treat age-related illnesses such as diabetes, Alzheimer's, heart disease and cancer in humans.
Researchers already know that restricting calories can prolong life in mice and other organisms.
Resveratrol seems to mimic the beneficial effects of eating less without the hassle of dieting. 
Middle-aged mice
Sinclair and an international team of scientists, including Australian researchers from the University of Sydney, analysed the impact of the molecule by studying three groups of middle-aged mice.
One group ate a standard diet, the second a high-calorie diet and the third had the same diet but were given supplements of resveratrol. 
Eight weeks after starting the study, the scientists noticed a difference between the two high-calorie groups.
By the time the mice were 114 weeks old, 58% in the high-calorie group had died, compared to 42% in the other groups. 
"After six months, resveratrol essentially prevented most of the negative effects of the high-calorie diet in mice," says Dr Rafael de Cabo, a co-author of the study from the US National Institute on Aging.
The study is continuing but so far the compound has extended the life span in the high-calorie mice by about 10-20%. 
"There is no question that we are seeing increased longevity," says Sinclair. 
In addition to increasing survival, the compound reduced the negative effects of being obese so the mice treated with resveratrol lived as long as the lean mice. 
They had healthier heart and liver tissue, decreased blood sugar levels, better insulin sensitivity and were more active than the other rodents. 
Which genes are involved?
When the scientists looked at the genetic level, to see which genes in the mice were switched on or off, they found the molecule had changed the gene expression pattern of the obese mice towards that of lean mice. 
The next step is to understand how the compound works. 
Sinclair and his colleagues believe a key component could be the SIRT1 gene, which is thought to be linked to life span extension. 
Sirtris Pharmaceuticals, a therapeutics company co-founded by Sinclair, has started a trial of a proprietary formulation of resveratrol in patients with type 2 diabetes.
"The real bang will be if somebody proves this is going to work in people," Sinclair adds.

Pigs are the most important domestic animal of the Pacific
Sacred pigs from Vanuatu are shedding new light on how domestic pigs spread throughout the world, say US and Australian researchers.
Dr Koji Lum, from Binghamton University in New York State, and colleagues publish their study on Pacific island pigs in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Pigs are the most important domestic animal in Pacific cultures, being an important source of food and a basis for societal wealth.
They are also sacred animals that some cultures believe have souls.
Yet the origin of Pacific pig breeds has long been unresolved.
Lum and team studied mitochondrial DNA, or mtDNA, from two kinds of sacred pigs from the island nation of Vanuatu.
One was a male of the Narave type. These intersex pigs don't produce enough steroid for complete masculinsation, say the researchers. So they cannot reproduce amongst themselves.
The breed is therefore carried forward by female carriers of the Navare traits.
The second type of sacred pig was the hairless Kapia.
Lum and team, which includes Kirk Huffman from the Australian Museum, compared mtDNA of the pigs from Vanuatu to mtDNA from pigs from Burma, Vietnam, China and the Ryukyu Islands.
They found that the Narave pig DNA matched the DNA of those breeds domesticated in southeast Asia over 3000 years ago.
"[This data suggests the Navare] pigs were recently domesticated within southeast Asia and dispersed during the human colonisation of remote Oceania associated with the Lapita cultural complex," write the researchers.
Interestingly, the researchers found that the other native Pacific pig they studied, Kapia, shared much of its DNA with introduced European breeds.
Two thirds of the DNA from the Kapia pig samples came from Berkshire and Large Black breeds introduced by Europeans.
The researchers say these breeds would have been chosen for crossing with native breeds because they had the same dark coat as the natives, ensuring the offspring remained protected from the tropical sun.
'Nice, but only half the story'
A previous study comparing pig skulls, by Professor Colin Groves of the Australian National University, also concluded southeast Asia was the most likely origin of Pacific pigs.
"[The Lum study is] a nice little confirmation of what we already suspected," says Groves.
But he says using mtDNA, which comes through the maternal line, means the researchers are only finding out the origin of the female pigs.
"They're only getting half the story here," he says.
Groves says if they tested the DNA from the Y chromosome of the Kapia, for example, they may find the main source of the recently introduced pig DNA was via the use of introduced boars rather than sows.
Groves says that while most of the domestic pigs that are widespread in the world today come from Europe, they are actually ultimately of either Chinese origin or half Chinese and half European.
He says European farmers bred their pigs with the fatter Chinese breeds to get a better domestic animal.

In less than 50 years, fish markets like this one in India may not have any produce to sell
The world's fish and seafood populations will collapse by 2048 if current trends in habitat destruction and overfishing continue, resulting in less food for humans, researchers say. 
When they analysed scientific data going back to the 1960s and historical records over a thousand years, they found that marine biodiversity - the variety of ocean fish, shellfish, birds, plants and micro-organisms - had declined dramatically. Some 29% of species were already in collapse. 
Extending this pattern into the future, the scientists calculate that by 2048 all species would be in collapse, which the researchers defined as having catches decline 90% from the maximum catch. 
This applies to all species, from mussels and clams to tuna and swordfish, says Assistant Professor Boris Worm, lead author of the study, which is published today in the journal Science. 
Ocean mammals, including seals, killer whales and dolphins, are also affected. 
"Whether we looked at tide pools or studies over the entire world's ocean, we saw the same picture emerging," says Worm, from Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
"In losing species we lose the productivity and stability of entire ecosystems. I was shocked and disturbed by how consistent these trends are, beyond anything we suspected."
When ocean species collapse, it makes the ocean itself weaker and less able to recover from shocks like global climate change, Worm says. 
The decline in marine biodiversity is largely due to overfishing and destruction of habitat, says Worm.
Over-exploitation
The loss of biodiversity makes ocean ecosystems less able to recover from the effects of global climate change, pollution and over-exploitation, Worm says. 
He likens a diverse ocean environment to a diversified investment portfolio. 
With lots of different species in the oceans, just as with lots of different kinds of investments, "you spread the risk around", Worm says. 
"In the ocean ecosystem, we're losing a lot of the species in our stock portfolio, and by that we're losing productivity and stability. By losing stability, we're losing the ability of the system to self-repair."
To help depleted areas rebuild, marine-life reserves and no-fishing zones need to be set up, the authors say. 
With marine reserves in place, fishing near the reserves can improve as much as four-fold, Worm says. 
Beyond the economic benefits to coastal communities where fishing is a critical industry, there are environmental benefits to rebuilding marine biodiversity, the scientists say. 
Depleted coastal ecosystems are vulnerable to invasive species, disease outbreaks, coastal flooding and noxious algae blooms, they report. 
Certain kinds of aquaculture, like the traditional Chinese cultivation of carp using vegetable waste, can also be beneficial, according to the scientists.
But farms that aim to raise carnivorous fish are less effective.

Mercury will cross the face of the Sun early Thursday morning Australian time, just like it did when this image was taken in 2003
Australians are in a prime position to see Mercury moving across the Sun this week, an event they won't be able to see again for another 26 years.
The transit, which can be seen using amateur telescopes on Thursday morning Australian time, is of particular interest to historians.
Astronomer Dr Nick Lomb of Sydney Observatory says the transit of Mercury in 1677 was the original astronomical event that triggered European colonisation of Australia, and not the transit of Venus, as commonly thought.
"There is a very direct link between the transit of Mercury and the fact that we are here and speak English in Australia," says Lomb.
On 7 November 1677 Edmond Halley witnessed a transit of Mercury from the south Atlantic island of St Helena. 
Lomb says this led him to suggest the idea that planetary transits could be used to work out the scale of the solar system, in particular how far the Earth was from the Sun.
And this eventually led to James Cook's voyage to Tahiti to observe the transit of Venus in 1769, which in turn resulted in the British colonisation of Australia.
Today, scientists use the transit of Mercury and Venus to study the chemical composition of the planets' atmospheres.
As a planet passes in front of the Sun, scientists can use spectroscopy to deduce information about its atmosphere by comparing the difference in the electromagnetic spectrum given off by the Sun and the planet.
Transits can also be used the study the momentary dimming of stars as a planet passes in front of it, a phenomenon used to detect planets circulating stars other than the Sun.
Mercury transits the Sun on average 13 times a century, says Lomb, more frequently than Venus, which only transits twice a century. 
Transits of Mercury occur in either May or November (when Mercury is closer to the Sun) and the next one will not occur until 2016. 
The next transit visible from Australia will not be until 2032.

A targeted approach to weeds, rather than spraying the whole field, could reduce costs and be safer for humans and the environment
A solar-powered robot could help farmers pinpoint and destroy weeds, significantly reducing the use of herbicides, its developers say.
The autonomous agricultural robot or AgBot has been designed by engineers at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
It uses cameras and vision recognition software to seek out weeds, cut them down and apply a precise amount of herbicide to the root.
The targeted approach requires fewer chemicals and minimises the risk that they will get into the environment, whether carried by wind or water.
Farmers typically apply herbicide to the entire field, making no distinction between crop and weed.
The herbicide can become airborne or, if it rains, leech into ground water. If inhaled or ingested in large quantities, some herbicides can be harmful to people.
Hong Young Jeon, a PhD candidate in agricultural and biological engineering, and Nathanael Gingrich, a master's student at the university, saw an opportunity to address the problem.
Working under the direction of agricultural engineer Associate Professor Lei Tian, the team built a robot about 1.5 metres long and 70 centimetres wide.
Solar powered
A curved solar panel mounted to the top gathers solar energy to charge a battery.
And the battery powers two small cameras, sensors, a GPS for navigation and an electric motor that drives the robot about 5 kilometres per hour.
The panel also serves as a canopy to protect the machine from the elements and provides shade for the vision system.
The vision system, although still in the beginning stages of development, will be designed to recognise the shape and structure of plants and be able to distinguish between a weed and a corn plant.
When a weed is spotted, a robotic arm attached to the front of the machine cuts the weed and then squirts herbicide onto the root.
The vision system will also allow the machine to recognise when it has arrived at the end of a row and to turn down the next lane.
Currently an operator controls the robot, but eventually it will work autonomously. 
And a wireless connection between the robot and a laptop computer could make it easy for the farmer to operate the machine from the comfort of his house.
"The farmer could control everything from the living room," says Jeon.
Worth the cost?
S&oslash;ren Marcus Pederson, a senior research fellow at Denmark's Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University in Frederiksberg, says surveys show that farmers are generally receptive to new technologies. But there has to be an economic advantage.
For example, using a small machine might require less fuel and would not compact the soil the way heavy machinery does. There is a cost associated with the labour needed to undo the compacting that occurs each year, says Pedersen.
But a cost advantage may be hard to see on low-value crops such as rice and corn.
"It's difficult for me to see a huge breakthrough in cereal crops. You have to start to focus on vegetables, potatoes and sugar beets, crops that have a relatively high value," says Pedersen.
Reliable?
And the robot's safety system would have to be reliable enough for it to operate autonomously.
"It's relatively costly to implement safety features on these robotic systems," he says.
"In principle, they can work the whole day, but if there is a requirement that it has to be attended, then you have to limit your time for using these systems."

There will still be fish on the menu, governments say, despite warnings that stocks will be depleted within 50 years
Governments and the UN food agency have cast serious doubts on a major scientific study that predicts all marine fish and seafood species face will collapse by 2048.
The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) says that the conservation effort must be improved.
But it says that it is "unlikely" there would be no seafood on consumers' plates by mid-century, calling the report "statistically dangerous". 
"Such a massive collapse ... would require reckless behaviour of all industries and governments for four decades, and an incredible level of apathy of all world citizens to let this happen, without mentioning economic forces that would discourage this from happening," says Serge Michel Garcia, director of the FAO's fishery resources division.
South Korea's fisheries ministry labelled the report "too radical", and says more scientific data is needed before heeding the call of environmentalists like Greenpeace to set aside 40% of oceans as marine reserves.
The cry for urgent action came in the wake of a report published in the current issue of the journal Science.
In the most exhaustive study conducted to date, US and Canadian researchers warned that overfishing and pollution threatened the accelerated loss of ocean species, ecosystems and human food supplies. 
The worldwide fishing industry currently extracts some 80 million tonnes of fish each year from the world's oceans, according to the FAO.
It represents a significant economic sector in many countries, including Scandinavia nations, where officials expressed scepticism about the report's conclusions.
"I don't think the oceans will be empty in 50 years time," says Helga Pedersen, the Norwegian minister of fisheries.
"That said, we have to work harder to secure sustainable management of fish stocks," she adds. 
Nordic fishing unions say industrial overfishing is not, in any case, the main culprit.
"Sure there are threatened species, but pollution is the main problem," says Lena Talvitie, vice-president of the Finnish federation of professional fishermen.
For environmentalists, however, the report's message was unequivocal. 
"Overfishing and pirate fishing are destroying our oceans at an alarming rate," says Greenpeace spokesman Nilesh Goundar in Australia. 
Some 29% of 8000 fished species were considered "collapsed" in 2003, that is, their catches had declined by 90% or more," says Assistant Professor Boris Worm of  Dalhousie University in Canada, lead author of the report.
The European Commission reacted by urging better international cooperation to turn around any doomsday scenario on the world's marine fish supply.

Mice engineered to have a low body temperature live longer, scientists show
Lowering the body temperature of mice without limiting the amount of food they eat can prolong their lives, a new study shows.
According to a study in the latest issue of the journal Science, female mice live up to 20% and males 12% longer.
"Our study shows it is possible to increase life span in mice by modest but prolonged lowering of core body temperature," says Bruno Conti, an associate professor at Scripps Research Institute in California, who led the study.
But it will take a long time to determine if the same applies to humans, the researchers say.
Scientists know that body temperature and ageing are linked in reptiles and other cold-blooded animals. 
They also know that the life span of warm-blooded creatures can be extended by reducing the number of calories they eat, which in turn lowers the body temperature by slowing down the metabolism.
So, the researchers carried out the study to determine whether calorie reduction is indeed responsible for extending animals' life, with a lowering of the body temperature being a secondary effect, or whether the latter is actually the cause of the increased longevity. 
They found that the increased life span is due to the lower body temperature, independent of the amount the mice eat.
Cooling down a mouse
In the study, the researchers lowered the body temperature of the mice 0.3-0.5&deg;C by genetically manipulating them.
They created mice that produce large amounts of a type of protein in the brain. This acts to heat up the brain's thermostat, a region of the hypothalamus. And the thermostat responds by reducing the core body temperature.
What about humans?
Professor Clifford Saper from the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center says that if core body temperature is critical in extending the life spans of mammals, "one might wonder whether 37&deg;C is indeed the optimal body temperature for humans, and why evolution has not selected for a lower body temperature and longer life span".
But before we look at manipulating how long humans live, he says "one would certainly want to know the consequences of hypothermia before pursuing it as a way to increase life span".

Could proposed new copyright laws restrict what you can get from a Google search?
Plugging a word or phrase into a search engine may soon give you fewer results if proposed new Australian copyright laws are adopted, according to internet giant Google.
The laws could open the way for Australian copyright owners to take action against search engines for caching and archiving material, Google says in a submission to a senate committee considering the legislation.
This could potentially limit the scope of the search engine results, which the internet company describes as effectively "condemning the Australian public to the pre-internet era".
Earlier this year the federal government announced its proposed changes to copyright law, which it says are designed to keep up with the rapidly changing digital landscape.
But in the submission to the senate legal and constitutional affairs committee, senior counsel and head of public policy at Google Inc, Andrew McLaughlin, says the changes fail to take into account the realities of the way in which information is processed and provided online.
"Google believes that the bill fails significantly to bring Australia's copyright act fully into the digital age," the submission says.
The internet company wants general "safety valve" provisions, as well as specific copyright exemptions, to protect search engines from falling foul of the law. 
"Given the vast size of the internet it is impossible for a search engine to contact personally each owner of a web page to determine whether the owner desires its web page to be searched, indexed or cached," Google submits.
"If such advance permission was required, the internet would promptly grind to a halt."
Google is also concerned about the effect of the copyright laws on digitisation projects, like its book search, which allows users to download books from the internet.
 Authors, news organisations and porn sites
Dr Matthew Rimmer, a copyright law expert from the Australian National University, says Google's concerns are justified and that the current laws haven't considered the crucial role search engines play in organising and providing information.
Google has already attracted legal action from the French press agency AFP, as well as authors and publishers in the US, he says.
The internet company is also appealing a decision which found in favour of a California pornographic company's breach of copyright claim against it.
Rimmer says internet search engines could be "crippled" by the proposed copyright changes, which protect libraries, archives and research institutions but leave commercial entities like Google out in the cold.
He says this will affect the ability of search engines to engage in digitisation projects like book search, provide images, index news stories and archive web content.
"Given the amount of litigation that Google has been involved in the last year I think they've got very genuine fears that they could be subject to copyright actions in Australia," he says.
He says rather than adopting the narrow "fair use" definitions contained in the legislation, Australia should adopt a US-style open-ended fair use defence to ensure a flow of and access to information.
"In the past when Google has been sued ... one of the things it did is take down its links and content.
"Google could very well become more reluctant to provide such comprehensive image and news services ... and with geo-identification technology you can also offer certain content in some countries and not others."
A spokesperson for attorney general Philip Ruddock says the committee has received 70 submissions, including one from Google, and all would be taken into account when considering the legislation.
"We will take on board all the submissions and the committee will take their views into account when they do their report," he says.
Submissions will be discussed at a public hearing in Canberra today.

Scientists hope they have a new way of tackling HIV/AIDS a bit like a Trojan Horse. They've engineered a 'faulty' version of HIV, infused it into the body and watched as it replicated harmless versions of itself
An AIDS virus genetically engineered to fight other AIDS viruses has worked better than expected, suppressing the virus and renewing the immune systems of a few patients, researchers report. 
The study involved just five people but the surprising results offer new hope both for the field of gene therapy and for treating the fatal and incurable AIDS virus.
But such an approach needs years more study, the researchers caution.
"The goal of this phase I trial was safety and feasibility and the results established that," says Dr Carl June of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, who led the study.
"But the results also hint at something much more," he adds. 
"It seemed to have a vaccine-like effect in that the immune system was better in most of the patients than when they enrolled. We are trying to study the mechanism." 
HIV infects close to 40 million people worldwide and has killed 25 million. A cocktail of drugs can help control infection, but there is no cure and no vaccine.
The drugs can cause severe side-effects in some patients and the virus can evolve resistance, so that patients have to move to new drug combinations.
Gene therapy is a promising but troubled field of research based on the premise that altering genes can cure disease.
It has cured only a few patients, and some have developed leukaemia as a consequence. One gene therapy volunteer died in 1999. 
June's team tried a new gene therapy approach, first crippling the HIV virus, they report today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
"The virus is gutted so that it only has half the size of the original or pathogenic virus," June says.
Antisense approach
The so-called envelope gene remains, and is reversed, a manipulation called antisense.
The researchers then recruited five patients with HIV who were beginning to fail treatment. Their drugs no longer worked and the virus was beginning to damage their immune systems. 
June's team removed the immune cells, CD4 T-cells, that HIV attacks. The researchers infected the CD4 cells in the lab with their newly engineered antisense HIV virus, then infused them back onto the patients.
When HIV or any other virus infects a cell, it injects its own genetic material into the cell. The cell is turned into a virus factory, sometimes pumping out thousands of copies of a virus before it explodes.
After the new antisense virus was infused, newly infected cells pumped out defective virus, June says. 
"The virus particles that are released are, like, sterile. They are nonpathogenic," June says. 
Safety first
This test was meant only to show that the approach was safe, and three years later, none of the patients show ill effects. 
The treatment appears to have helped restore the immune systems of four of the five patients, and the virus remains partly suppressed. 
"We put back more [CD4 cells] than we took out. We don't know if that is why their immune system gets better, because there are more soldiers, or whether it got better because of better antiviral effects," June says. 
The therapy is being developed by Gaithersburg, Maryland-based VIRxSYS Corp and the studies are partly paid for by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. 
Phase II trials are under way in HIV patients who have disease well-controlled by drugs. June says it is not yet clear if the treatment could work only in infected patients, or might even be used as a preventive vaccine some day.

The aircraft's 'belly' has been designed to improve lift
Plans for a new generation of silent aircraft, designed to slash noise output while also cutting fuel consumption, have been unveiled by UK and US aeronautics experts.
The single-wing aircraft would hold 250 passengers and use 25% less fuel than the current average, say its creators who hope to have it flying commercially by 2030.
The Silent Aircraft Initiative (SAI) has since 2003 gathered some 40 researchers from the University of Cambridge and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as well as an array of aeronautics-linked firms.
As well as cutting engine noise, the designers focused on adapting the structure of the aircraft, which is responsible for half of the noise a plane creates on landing.
To do this they created a single flying wing, with the body of the aircraft also functioning to give lift.
This allows a slower approach which reduces noise as well as improving fuel efficiency at cruising altitudes, the researchers say.
The new plane also does away with flaps, a major source of noise, while the undercarriage has been simplified and its aerodynamics improved.
The engines are mounted on the top of the aircraft, to screen much noise from the ground.
Some backers of the project admit to having had doubts at first about its viability.
"My first reaction on hearing of the Silent Aircraft Initiative was profound scepticism," says Dr John Green of Greener by Design, which promotes environmentally-friendly air transport options.
"Three years on, I have to concede that the SAI has surpassed my expectations by quite a margin.  The team has produced a ... credible design that is predicted to meet the original target."

There are concerns that a merger between two Sydney museums will eat up resources
International researchers are so concerned about the proposed merger between the Australian and Powerhouse museums that they are urging the government to drop its plans.
In letters to New South Wales arts minister Bob Debus obtained by ABC Science Online, they say a merger would jeopardise scientific research.
The government wants to bring both museums under one board and integrate them "at a functional level", according to a letter Debus sent to the president of the Australian Museum Trust, Brian Sherman, in August.
Professor Victor Springer, of the Smithsonian Institute's National Museum of Natural History, says such a move could jeopardise the Australian Museum's worldwide contribution to science.
"I ask you with the most sincere and profound concern to ensure that neither the quantity nor the quality of the scientific research capacity at the Australian Museum suffers as a result of the proposed merger," he says.
Others, including Professor Lee Fuiman, director of the University of Texas Marine Science Institute, and senior curator at the Royal Ontario Museum, Dr Richard Winterbottom, have also appealed for the government to drop the merger plans.
"It appears to me that if this merger were to proceed, scientific research at the Australian Museum would be marginalised or might even disappear," Fuiman writes.
Professor Richard Rosenblatt, of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California San Diego, writes that he is concerned "the proposed merger ... will result in a loss of scientific research capacity and positions".
Australian scientists also concerned
Scientists from the University of Sydney, University of Wollongong and the Australian Marine Sciences Association have also written to express concern, as has a delegation of prominent members of the science community that is understood to have presented the government with a petition last week.
Their concerns are understood to include the fact that the Powerhouse and Australian museums have a separate history, manage different collections and have diverse research priorities.
In a letter to scientists, Debus says the government is doing a feasibility study to examine the "benefits, costs and issues" associated with combining the boards of the two museums.
He says the need to protect their expertise is a paramount concern and that the government is taking a "careful and considered approach to this matter".
But the Public Service Association of New South Wales, which represents some of the 550 staff at both museums, has described the move as a cost-cutting exercise and fait accompli that will go ahead regardless of the outcome of the study.
Director of the Australian Museum, Frank Howarth, was not available to comment.
Scorpion fish and tiny vertebrates
Among research at the Australian Museum has been the discovery of a new species of scorpion fish in Sydney Harbour and what could be the world's smallest vertebrate, the stout infantfish (Schindleria brevipinguis), in the Great Barrier Reef.
A staff member at the Australian Museum, speaking on the condition of anonymity, says there are fears that research will be cut altogether or at least downgraded under an amalgamation.
"The Powerhouse Museum doesn't have a scientific research component like we do and it would be easy to say this doesn't fit  into the new model so let's get rid of [research] all together," he says.
"There's a school of thought that says this stuff should be at universities."
He says five of the museum's 20 designated research positions are vacant and are almost certain not to be renewed in the event of a merger.
Staff have already begun looking elsewhere because of uncertainty about the museum's future, he says.
One scientist, a world leader in his field, is understood to have already accepted a job at the Natural History Museum in London.
Report due
Dr Des Griffin, who resigned in 1998 after 22 years as director of the Australian Museum, says the plan to bring the two bodies under a new, single governing body will have little benefit for either the museums or the public.
He says all areas, including scientific research, social history and collection conservation, are likely to be hit.
A steering committee consisting of departmental and museum representatives is due to report to the government on the amalgamation plan on 22 November.
The report comes amid uncertainty about how the amalgamation will proceed when Debus, who recently announced his retirement, quits parliament at the state election in  March.

The solar flare was hundreds of thousands times more powerful than this one, a typical solar flare from our Sun seen in 2005. The II Pegasi flare was too distant to image in detail
The most colossal x-ray flare ever detected has been caught in the act of zapping its solar system with planet-killing radiation.
The star is II Pegasi in the constellation Pegasus, about 135 light-years from Earth. 
That means the explosive flare seen by the NASA Swift satellite, designed to detect much more distant and powerful gamma-ray bursts, took place around the year 1871. Light from the event is only now reaching Earth.
The x-ray flare is the first-ever detected beyond our own Sun that bears a striking resemblance to the much smaller 'x-class' flares generated occasionally by our own Sun.
"It's a hundred thousand times more powerful than the largest solar flares ever recorded," says astronomer Dr Steven Drake of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center.
Despite being far more powerful, it looks like it was created in the same way, he says.
It starts with a tangle of magnetic field lines on the surface of a star that short-circuits. When that happens, atomic particles are accelerated to speeds only seen on Earth in high-tech particle accelerators.
The accelerated particles can emit gamma rays, which is what caught the Swift satellite's attention in the first place.
When the satellite turned to face II Pegasi, it took aim with its x-ray detector and caught the hour-long eruption of x-rays.
Violent eruption
The x-rays were created as material violently erupted from the star and then arched back down and slammed back onto its surface.
By comparison, x-ray flares on the Sun last only second or minutes, at most.
"It's certainly one of the biggest ever seen," says Drake about the II Pegasi flare. It's the hands-down winner in terms of those seen in 'soft' x-rays, which are the rays just beyond the wavelength of extreme ultraviolet light.
Drake is a co-author on a paper on the flare that is being presented by the University of Maryland's Dr Rachel Osten at a meeting in Pasadena this week.
Flaming star
What's less surprising about the flare, however, is that it originated from II Pegasi, says Pennsylvania State University astrophysicist Professor Eric Feigelson.
"It's known to be one of the most flaring stars," says Feigelson. If he had been asked to guess which nearby stars were capable of belting out such a flare, II Pegasi would have been among his top 10, he says.
Despite being a middle-aged star that ought to be past this sort of wild and violent behaviour, II Pegasi is part of a tightly-bound two-star system in which the stars are roaring around each other, generating powerful tidal forces that keep II Pegasi riled up.
Fortunately our own Sun is relatively quiet and stable, with x-ray flares that are unable to penetrate Earth's atmosphere.

The bill lifts a ban on therapeutic cloning, allowing the creation of human embryos for research
Australian scientists will not be allowed to use animal eggs to create embryonic stem cells under a bill passed by the Senate this week.
For now, this rules out creating 'hybrid' human-animal cells for human disease research in Australia.
Despite this, top stem cell researchers have welcomed the bill, which lifts a ban on therapeutic cloning by allowing the creation of human embryos specifically for research.
The bill, which will now go before the House of Representatives, allows a process called somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).
This involves removing the nucleus from an egg and replacing it with one from a non-reproductive body cell, of a patient for example, to produce an embryo, the same method used to produce Dolly the sheep.
Under the bill, narrowly passed by two votes in the Senate, SCNT embryos will not be implanted, but used to produce embryonic stem cells and then destroyed after 14 days.
The Lockhart report late last year called for amendments to Australian cloning law to allow therapeutic cloning using SCNT, and it recommended that both human and animal eggs be permitted for use in research.
But the bill passed this week rules out the use of an animal egg as a host for a human nucleus.
It comes at the same time that researchers in the UK are requesting permission to use cow eggs fused with human material for research on Parkinson's, stroke and Alzheimer's.
Lockhart committee member, Professor Loane Skene from the University of Melbourne, says the committee recommended that animal eggs be used in research to reduce the demand on women for eggs.
"It's an invasive procedure for a woman to donate an egg and the eggs are very precious," says Skene. "So we thought it would be better to allow another source of eggs, namely animal eggs, to be used."
"It was never envisaged that any stem cells that were produced from this would go into treatments for people."
Bill welcomed despite animal egg ban
Despite the ban on animal eggs, leading stem cell researchers have welcomed the bill.
Professor Bernie Tuch of the University of New South Wales in Sydney says the decision is as momentous as the assassination of US president John F Kennedy.
"Reason has prevailed," says Tuch, who is quietly confident the bill will pass the House of Representatives.
Professor Alan Trounson of Monash University in Melbourne says the decision is consistent with public opinion show by surveys to be 60-80% in favour of therapeutic cloning.
"I'm very pleased," he says.
But Trounson says the decision to ban the use of animal eggs will limit research.
He says research using animal eggs helps understand the factors in cells that are responsible for reprogramming it to become pluripotent, capable of turning into many other kinds of cells.
And he says the hope is that these factors could one day be identified and made synthetically, thus eliminating the need for embryos altogether in stem cell research.
But he says thousands of eggs are required to sequence and identify the factors and there are just not enough human eggs for this. 
"You can't get thousands of human eggs to extract the factors," he says.
Tuch is less concerned about a shortage of eggs.
He says one possible source will be the 240 women a year that have their ovaries removed because a genetic predisposition to ovarian cancer.
Trading eggs?
Trounson says eggs will be gathered internationally for research to find suitable embryonic stem cell lines.
A sociologist who studies the global trade in human and animal tissue, Peta Cook of the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane says it's this international context that needs to be considered when it comes to the pressures on women to sell their eggs.
While this is illegal in Australia, Cook says there is a booming international trade in body parts.
"If I need a kidney, I can travel to Pakistan or India and receive one from a live donor," she says. "It is close to an on-demand system."
Similarly, women in Eastern Europe have had their eggs taken illicitly and sold by health-care professionals, says Cook.
She says that in the US a woman can sell her eggs for up to US$10,000 and this is very tempting to poor university students and such financial incentives can undermine informed consent and autonomous decision-making.

Climate changes in Greenland over the past 150,000 years are reflected in Antarctica, scientists show. They say the link is a conveyor belt of ocean currents that links north and south
Antarctica and Greenland may be at opposite ends of the planet but their climate systems appear to be linked by a remarkable ocean current, a study shows.
The results, published today in the journal Nature, suggest that Antarctica's ice could eventually start to melt because of localised warming in the far North Atlantic. 
The evidence comes from a 2500 metre ice core, drilled by European scientists at Dronning Maud Land, on the part of Antarctica that faces the South Atlantic.
With its compacted layers of ice and telltale concentrations of methane in trapped air bubbles, the core yields a picture of snowfall and atmospheric temperatures going back 150,000 years. 
Even better than that, it can be matched with cores of similar amplitude drilled in the Greenland icesheet.
Put together, the cores provide the first solid evidence to back a theory that millennial scale climate changes that have unfolded in the far north and south of the Atlantic are not isolated, local events, but linked. 
The glacial climate in the Northern Atlantic can swing extraordinarily rapidly, with temperatures rising by 8-16&deg;C within the space of a few decades at the end of each Ice Age and falling back, albeit more slowly, when the next Ice Age beckons.
Antarctica, though, has far smaller temperature shifts, of between 1-3&deg;C, and these unfold over millennia.
But the two sets of ice cores point to what the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica scientists describe as a bipolar seesaw
In short, what happens at one end of the Atlantic has a huge effect on the other, although at different time scales and in different ways. 
The cause appears to be a conveyor-belt system of ocean flows.
On the conveyor belt 
Relative heat from the Southern Ocean around Antarctica is picked up by a complex system called the meridional overturning circulation (MOC), of which the Gulf Stream is the best-known component. 
The MOC channels warm surface water up to the North Atlantic, coincidentally enabling countries in northwestern Europe to have a balmy climate despite their northerly latitude. 
When this warm water reaches the far north, it cools and sinks, and the MOC sends it back south, back down towards Antarctica, at depths far below the ocean's surface. 
"Our data shows that the degree of warming in the south is linearly related to the duration of cold periods in the North Atlantic," says lead author Dr Hubertus Fischer of Germany's Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research in Bremerhaven.
Understanding this link also sheds light on what the researchers say is a troubling aspect about human-induced climate change: the fate of Antarctica, where the world's biggest store of frozen water is held.
"Today, Antarctica is still a reservoir of cold. We don't see any contribution to global sea-level change because of Antarctica, it's not melting yet. In fact there has been more precipitation and some models suggest that Antarctica actually will grow a little," Fischer says. 
That reassuring scenario could change if, as some studies are now tentatively suggesting, the MOC is beginning to falter, says Fischer. 
The causes for this slowing of the Atlantic conveyor belt could be a run-off of cold water from melting Siberian permafrost or the Greenland icesheet, triggered by rising atmospheric temperatures.
But any disruption would lead to a build-up of warmer water off Antarctica, according to the conveyor-belt theory.
"If the thermohaline [ocean convection] circulation in the Atlantic slows down just a little, it would cause a warming in the Southern Ocean," Fischer says. 
"And if you have warming around Antarctica, at a certain point, the fringes of Antarctica will even warm over the melting point. Then we could start to see melting at the borders and run-off and that would contribute to sea-level rise."

Transplanted photoreceptor cell shown in green against a background of the host's retina
Scientists have restored the sight of blind mice by transplanting light-sensitive cells into their eyes, a new study shows.
The mice suffered from eye damage called photoreceptor loss, which occurs in macular degeneration, the leading cause of sight loss in the elderly, and other eye disorders.
But instead of using stem cells, which could form into any cell type, the scientists transplanted cells that had reached a later stage of development towards becoming photoreceptor cells.
The international team publishes its results today in the journal Nature.
"We have shown for the first time that it is possible to transplant photoreceptors," says lead author Dr Robert MacLaren, a scientist and eye surgeon at Moorfields Eye Hospital in London.
"These cells are lost in some of the more common causes of blindness," he adds.
The scientists believe further research could lead to the first human retinal cell transplants for people with blinding diseases within a decade.
Photoreceptors are specialised light sensitive cells that line the back of the eye and are essential for sight. In eye diseases such as macular degeneration the cells are destroyed.
Previous studies that had used stem cells, master cells that have the potential to become any type of cell in the body, had failed because the cells did not form into photoreceptors.
Researchers had thought that the mature retina, the part of the eye that senses light and forms images, did not have the capacity for repair.
MacLaren and his collaborators showed using precursor cells that are already programmed to become photoreceptors, but are not quite there yet, was the key to successful transplantation.
"We have taken them out of the donor retina and transplanted them into a host retina extremely quickly at that precise point in time and with minimal trauma to the surrounding tissue," MacLaren explains. 
The mice had eye diseases caused by genetic defects. 
Scientists have recently found cells on the margin of the retina in humans that have stem-cell like properties and could potentially be grown in the lab to become photoreceptor precursor cells for treatment.
"Rather than focusing on stem cells we believed that if we could understand how cells develop and become photoreceptors ... our transplantation efforts would meet with greater success," says Professor Anand Swaroop, of the University of Michigan Medical School and a co-author of the study.
"This technique gives us new insights in repairing damage to the retina and possibly other parts of the central nervous system," he adds.

Online searches can help doctors keep up to date with an increasing pool of medical research
It's not just patients who are frantically plugging their symptoms into Google to see what disease they might have. Australian researchers say doctors are doing it too.
Dr Hangwi Tang and Dr Jennifer Ng of the Princess Alexandra Hospital in Brisbane report their findings today online in the British Medical Journal.
Tang says the study was driven by personal curiosity after noticing how patients and doctors alike were using Google to diagnose difficult cases.
In one example he had a patient whose father used the search engine to correctly diagnose that his son had the rare circulatory condition Paget-von Schr�tter syndrome.
Tang and Ng selected 26 difficult cases presented in the New England Journal of Medicine, including Cushing's syndrome, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, encephalitis and cirrhosis.
They then plugged the symptoms of each case into the search engine to come up with a diagnosis.
When these diagnoses were compared with the correct published diagnoses, the researchers found that Google got it right 58% of the time.
They say an online search is likely to be more effective at helping to diagnose conditions with unique symptoms that can be used as search terms.
Tang says part of the challenge in using Google is to be able to efficiently sift through the many pages of links that you get from an online search.
And he thinks that doctors are better placed than patients at doing this because they are better at selecting relevant links.
"I don't think Google can replace doctors, in other words," says Tang.
Millions of facts
Doctors have been estimated to carry two million facts in their heads to help them to diagnose disease, the researchers say.
But search engines allow them to get quick access to an ever increasing medical knowledge base that might be impossible to hold in their head.
Google in particular gives access to more than three billion articles, they say, with Google Scholar restricting searches to peer reviewed articles.
Tang says while there are a number of other search engines that clinicians can use, they often prefer Google because it is so easy to use and freely available.
Other studies
Professor Johanna Westbrook of the Centre for Health Informatics in Sydney says the findings are consistent with her own.
Her team looked at how specialised search engines could help clinicians to both diagnose and treat patients, using the best available evidence.
The study found clinicians were 21% more likely to give the correct answers when they used online search engines.
Interestingly though, a few clinicians got the wrong answers using the search engines, although they got the right answers without them.
Westbrook says this underscores the importance of learning how to interpret complex evidence.
Another interesting finding was that clinical nurse consultants using the search engines were just as accurate as doctors.
Westbrook says this suggests search engines might help such nurses to diagnose and treat patients in rural areas where there are fewer doctors.
"[An online search engine is] available 24 hours a day," she says. "Whereas you can't get a clinician 24 hours a day. You can't get to a hospital library 24 hours a day."
Westbrook says that while Google might be good for helping find information about diseases with unique symptoms, more sophisticated search engines would be required for more complex diseases.

A gene type that governs brain size, which may have had a Neanderthal origin, exists in modern humans
Neanderthals may have given the modern humans who replaced them a priceless gift, a gene that helped them develop superior brains, US researchers report.
And the only way they could have provided that gift would have been by interbreeding, say the scientists. 
Their study, published online in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences this week, provides indirect evidence that modern Homo sapiens and Neanderthals interbred at some point when they lived side by side in Europe.
"Finding evidence of mixing is not all that surprising. But our study demonstrates the possibility that interbreeding contributed advantageous variants into the human gene pool that subsequently spread," says Professor Bruce Lahn, a Howard Hughes Medical Institute researcher at the University of Chicago who led the study.
Scientists have been debating whether Neanderthals, who died out about 35,000 years ago, ever bred with modern H. sapiens. Neanderthals are considered more primitive, with robust bones but a smaller intellects than modern humans.
Lahn's team found a brain gene that appears to have entered the human lineage about 1.1 million years ago.
It has a modern form, or allele, that appeared about 37,000 years ago, right before Neanderthals became extinct.
"The gene microcephalin (MCPH1) regulates brain size during development and has experienced positive selection in the lineage leading to Homo sapiens," the researchers write. 
Positive selection means the gene conferred some sort of advantage, so that people who had it were more likely to have descendants than people who did not.
A common variant
Lahn's team estimate that 70% of all living humans have this type D variant of the gene.
"By no means do these findings constitute definitive proof that a Neanderthal was the source of the original copy of the D allele. However, our evidence shows that it is one of the best candidates," Lahn says. 
The researchers reached their conclusions by doing a statistical analysis of the DNA sequence of microcephalin, which is known to play a role in regulating brain size in humans.
Mutations in the human gene cause development of a much smaller brain, a condition called microcephaly. 
By tracking smaller, more regular mutations, the researchers looked at DNA's genetic clock and dated the original genetic variant to 37,000 years ago. 
They note that this D allele is very common in Europe, where Neanderthals lived, and more rare in Africa, where they did not.
What's the advantage?
Lahn says it is not yet clear what advantage the D allele gives the human brain.
"The D alleles may not even change brain size; they may only make the brain a bit more efficient if it indeed affects brain function," he says. 
Now his team is looking for evidence of Neanderthal origin for other human genes.

Each of these spawning sea urchins share more than 7000 genes with humans
Scientists who have sequenced the genome of the sea urchin say these brainless and limbless invertebrates are surprisingly similar to humans.
They found that the California purple sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) genome has 23,300 genes.
And it shares 7077 of them with humans.
The genetic ties are far closer than scientists expect and make the sea urchin a closer genetic cousin of humans than the worm or fruit fly, according to the study in today's issue of the journal Science. 
"Nobody would've predicted that sea urchins have such a robust gene set for visual perception," says Gary Wessel, a Brown University biology professor and member of the Sea Urchin Genome Sequencing Consortium.
"I've been looking at these organisms for 31 years, and now I know they were looking back at me." 
Among other surprises from the project were that researchers found sea urchins have the most sophisticated innate immune system of any animal studied to date.
They say this may be one reason they live 100 years or more. 
Sea urchins also carry genes associated with human diseases such as muscular dystrophy and Huntington's. 
The creatures also have genes associated with taste, smell, hearing and balance, the study found.

Picture books help 2-3 year olds learn about the world. But are some books better than others?
Toddlers can re-enact what they see, hear and learn from picture books, new research shows.
The finding suggests that picture books may play a much greater role than simply entertaining toddlers and may help them understand the world.
Researchers from the University of Queensland and the University of Virginia publish their findings in the latest issue of the journal Developmental Psychology.
Researchers know that picture books can help 4-5 year old preschoolers with a range of literary and 'life' skills.
But it is harder to assess what 2-3 year olds learn simply because they don't have the language skills to tell us.
"So what we did in our study was to let toddlers show us what they know using a re-enactment, or imitation paradigm," says Australian author Dr Gabrielle Simcock, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Queensland.
Researchers read toddlers a picture book that described how to make a toy rattle.
They then asked the toddlers to make a rattle using the objects supplied: a green wooden ball, a stick attached to a plastic lid and a clear plastic jar.
Some 36 children in each of three age groups (18 months, 24 months and 30 months) were read either a picture book featuring colour photographs of a rattle being made, a picture book with coloured pencil drawings of a rattle being made, or not read a book at all.
Overall, children across all groups shown the colour photograph book were more successful in their attempts to make a rattle than those shown a colour drawing book or no book.
Toddlers aged 24 months and 30 months did equally well with both versions of the book.
But the 18 month toddlers shown the colour photograph book did much better than those shown the colour drawing book.
"The 18 month children needed the representation in the book to be highly realistic and to match very closely to the real world before they could understand, while the older children were much more flexible in their ability to use the pictures."
The control group was least likely to be able to make the rattle.
Simcock says the findings are exciting, but don't mean that parents should only read their children only picture books with real-life photographs.
"I think it's through cumulative exposure to a wide range of different types of books and illustrations that children begin to abstract that the pictures in the books can represent real world things," she says.
"And not all books are informative about the real world; often they might be animals talking and doing things ... [simply to] entertain."

The idea is you would be able to recharge your laptop without plugging it in
You may one day be able to recharge your laptop or mobile phone without having to plug it into the wall, says a US physicist.
But others say there are many hurdles before such transfer of energy means we can say goodbye to wires.
Assistant Professor Marin Soljacic, of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, will present his team's work at the American Institute of Physics forum in San Francisco this week.
Today's wireless transfer of energy, such as the transfer of light energy from the Sun for solar power or the transfer of microwaves from transmitters for communication, involve relatively low levels of energy.
But recharging devices like laptops requires a much higher level of energy. And if this was routinely zapped through the air it could 'fry' any living organisms that get in the way.
But Soljacic says he's found a way of transmitting energy so that only the devices that it is recharging will pick it up, so it will not affect humans.
Instead of using traditional radiation, he wants to use the part of the electromagnetic field that is 'non-radiative'.
He says devices can be tuned to the frequency of this field and thus act as a sink for all the energy the transmitter gives out.
Soljacic says this would prevent energy radiating out to areas it doesn't need to go to providing an efficient and safe method of wireless energy transfer.
"The team calculates that an object the size of a laptop could be recharged within a few metres of the power source," he says. "Placing one source in each room could provide coverage throughout your home."
Soljacic also thinks the technology could be used to power freely roaming robots in a factory.
Finding a 'magic' frequency
But Australian physicists, yet to see the full details of Soljacic's work, are sceptical of his claims.
They say the challenge is finding a 'magic' frequency that doesn't also affect with living organisms and thus pose possible health risks.
"You would be reintroducing all the problems that we went through with mobile phones," says Dr Geoff Anstis of the University of Technology, Sydney, referring to the uncertainty surrounding any long-term health effects of using mobiles.
"And it wouldn't be until a couple of decades that you may be happy that there isn't a significant problem."
His colleague Professor Geoff Smith agrees and says there are also technical challenges to keeping the devices tuned with the transmitters, thus preventing the general release of stray energy.
"I think this is nice physics but there's a way to go before it would be possible," says Smith.
He says any changes in the surrounding environment could "de-tune" the system and stop the safe and efficient transfer of power.
Electrical engineer, Dr Trevor Bird of CSIRO's ICT Centre says attempts so far to develop wireless power transfer have not been very successful.
He agrees that safety and technical barriers to wireless power systems are huge and would like further details on Soljacic's proposal.
Bird also says that, depending on the frequency of the field, the antenna on the device being recharged may have to be very large.

Eye of the storm
Saturn has cooked up a sizeable storm that scientists say is the first in the solar system besides Earth to feature a hurricane-like eye and well formed towers of clouds.
The storm is smaller than the famed Great Red Spot churning away on Saturn's giant neighbour Jupiter, but is still formidable.
It sprawls for about two-thirds the diameter of Earth across Saturn's southern pole.
"It looks like a hurricane, but it doesn't behave like a hurricane," says Dr Andrew Ingersoll, a Cassini scientist at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
The NASA Cassini spacecraft spent three hours on 11 October observing the beast and clocked its winds at 550 kilometres per hour, twice as strong as Hurricane Katrina at its peak. 
The spacecraft also imaged a shadow cast by clouds stacked above and ringed around the south pole, as well as two spiral arms of clouds protruding from the central ring.
Scientists estimate the tower of clouds spans 30-75 kilometres above the clouds in the centre. That's between two and five times taller than the clouds that surround the eye of a hurricane on Earth.
The Saturn storm can grow much taller because the planet's hydrogen-helium atmosphere is much less dense than Earth's at comparable pressures.
Also unlike hurricanes on Earth, the storm is not moving around, but appears locked at Saturn's south pole.
And with a temperature of around minus 170&deg;C, there is no ocean, nor warm tropical water to pump its strength.
At the base of the eye, scientists can discern, but not explain, dark clouds. They do know Saturn's south pole is warmer than the rest of the planet.
"The winds decrease with height and the atmosphere is sinking, compressing and heating over the [planet's] south pole," says Dr Richard Achterberg of NASA's Goddard Spaceflight Center.
Additional observations are planned as the seasons change on Saturn and the south pole transitions from summer to autumn.
"Whatever it is, we're going to focus on the eye of this storm and find out why it's there," Ingersoll says.

Dr Richard Helmer plays air guitar
It could make an ideal Christmas present in years to come. Australian scientists have built a t-shirt that lets you play 'air guitar' for real.
Dr Richard Helmer and his CSIRO colleagues stitched wearable sensors into an ordinary long sleeved t-shirt to create a prototype of what they're calling a 'wearable instrument shirt'.
Simply by moving one arm to choose chords and the other to strum some imaginary strings, home rockers wearing the shirt could make actual music.
The tunes come courtesy of a pair of small but resilient sensors placed in the elbows of the t-shirt.
The sensors bend when you move your arm, sending wireless signals to custom software that turns them into audio samples.
"When you move your arm it bends a filament in the sensor, which changes its resistance," says Helmer. "It's a bit like a volume control."
One of the smart things about the technology is the sturdiness of the interface, Helmer says.
The materials can all stand up to ultraviolet light, moisture and movement, so working up a sweat is less likely to cause problems.
"It allows you to jump around and the sound generated is just like an original mp3," he says.
The shirt is part of a wider CSIRO program on intelligent fabrics that aims to tackle more serious applications like health monitoring or 3D computer interfaces.
So why design an air guitar?
"I thought we needed to do something that was a little less serious that people could have fun with," Helmer says.
In the meantime, the researchers aren't deaf to the possibility that their experiment could have commercial potential.
"It depends on how much people want it," Helmer says.
The price might start out relatively high, but over a year or two could drop down to "Christmas present level", the researcher says.
At this stage, no-one knows exactly how much it might retail for, but it would probably be in the hundreds of dollars, Helmer suggests.
A small price to pay, perhaps, for turning rock star fantasies into reality.

Seabirds and migratory birds are early responders to changes in climate, according to a new report
Nearly three quarters of all bird species in northeast Australia and more than a third in Europe could become extinct unless efforts to stop global warming are stepped up, a report says. 
Up to 72% of bird species in northeastern Australia and 38% of bird species in Europe could disappear completely if the planet's temperature continues to rise, according to the international environmental group WWF.
"This report finds certain bird groups, such as seabirds and migratory birds, to be early, very sensitive responders to current levels of climate change," says WWF's director of climate change policy Hans Verolme. 
"Large-scale bird extinctions may occur sooner than we thought," he says in Bird species and climate change: the global status report, released today on the sidelines of the UN climate change conference in Nairobi.
"If high rates of extinction are to be avoided, rapid and significant greenhouse gas emissions cuts must be made," WWF says. 
Rising sea levels, changes in vegetation and altered temperatures are among the effects of climate change linked to greenhouse gas emissions that impact negatively on bird species worldwide, it says. 
In the Great Plains of North America, where up to 80% of the continent's ducks come to breed, three quarters may face extinction because of adverse global warming-related changes to their habitat, the report says.
While the effects would be most significant if the Earth's surface temperature rises 2&deg;C above its pre-industrial level - it is currently 0.8&deg;C above - some birds are already feeling the heat.
The penguin population of the Galapagos Islands has decreased by half since the early 1970s, due to starvation and an inability to reproduce resulting from the effects of the El Ni&ntilde;o climate pattern.
While migratory, mountain, island, wetland, Artic, Antarctic and seabirds are all at high risk from climate change, other species that are able to move easily to new habitats will not be as badly effected, it says.
Scientists also point out that existing conservation programs do not provide sufficient protection, as bird species often shift into unprotected zones, the report says.

Psychologists says the secret of good batting is being able to anticipate the intent of the bowler
The best batsmen can predict the sort of ball a bowler's going to deliver before it even leaves his hands, a new study into the psychology of cricket shows.
Less successful batsmen aren't so highly attuned to subtle visual clues, reports Dr Sean M�ller of RMIT University in the latest issue of the Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
M�ller's study shows that a top batsman can predict how a ball will swing and where it will bounce well before it's airborne.
"[Experienced players] can pick up ... cues that the intermediate and novice players don't or aren't sensitive to," he says.
A less skilled batsman can only make these judgements once the ball is in flight, giving him less time to get in the right position.
Time is critical as it can take just half a second from when the ball leaves the bowler's hand to it reaching the crease.
Video simulations
M�ller put members of the Australian cricket team through a number of tests, which were also repeated on intermediate and novice cricket players.
Participants included former captain Steve Waugh and Ricky Ponting, who'll skipper Australia when it faces England in the first Ashes Test in Brisbane next week.
In one test, the subjects were shown a video of a bowler running up, from the batsman's point of view.
The video was stopped at various stages of the run-up and delivery, and subjects were required to make a prediction about the ball based on this limited information.
They were also shown a video with various parts of the bowler's body blocked out, for example, with just a hand.
"We occluded all of the bowler ... so you'd see this little hand running in all the way from the start and then it'll stop, the screen will go black at the point of ball release," he says.
Experiments were also carried out on the field with batsmen wearing goggles that blacked out parts of the bowler's body.
Inherent or learnt skill?
M�ller says it appears that movement-related cue-reading is subconscious, because even the batsmen who were best at anticipating the bowler's intention couldn't specify why.
M�ller says while some people may be naturally more attuned to picking up visual cues, it's likely this can be taught and learned.
"You need to be exposed to different types of bowlers, different ways the ball spins, in order to learn the relationship between a cue and what will actually happen," he says.
"It takes time to develop [this skill] and practice is needed."
Can we improve batting?
His next study will look at whether videos and goggles can be used to refine predictive ability and improve batting.
"If a player is going through a slump you could use this method to pick up if they need remedial work in picking up particular cues," he says.
The study has other practical implications.
M�ller says honing our skills of predictive judgement can make us better drivers or help us cross roads more safely.
He says humans probably developed predictive judgement as an evolutionary skill to help avoid injury or attack.
M�ller was a PhD student at the University of Queensland when he conducted the research.

This false colour image reveals a large dust cloud in the globular cluster M15 (in red), the first time that dust has been seen there
Dawdling old stars, and not just the spectacular explosions of massive supernovae, may create much of the cosmic dust that builds generations of new stars and planets like our own, say astronomers.
The NASA Spitzer Space Telescope has spied loads of dust in what was expected to be a dust-free stellar cluster of old stars, known as M15, in the distant Pegasus cluster.
The surprising observations are pointing to a new way of looking at how the galactic star-making factories work.
It also may help explain why there's so much more cosmic dust than can be accounted for by supernovae alone.
"[It] was very surprising to see the dust there," says Chick Woodward, an astronomy professor at the University of Minnesota.
Woodward and graduate student Martha Boyer led a study of the dust, which appears in the Astrophysical Journal.
"In a sense it's a very simple observation," but one that had never been made so clearly before, says astronomer Professor Christopher Sneden of the University of Texas at Austin.
Now there is no doubt that the dust is coming from the old stars. That could help balance the galactic dust equation.
But before the researchers can even get to that, they need to explain a more fundamental mystery of M15's dust, says Woodward.
Lots of dust
According to the accepted theory, cosmic dust needs to be seeded by heavier elements like silicon, oxygen and carbon, which tend to be products of bigger, short-lived stars.
But M15's big old stars are poor in heavy elements, and there's still lots of dust.
"How do we form dust when we don't have the metals around to condense them?" says Woodward. Astronomers call all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium 'metals'.
The fact that dust could be forming in space without metals could mean astronomers may have to revise their basic theories on where and out of what sort of dust newer stars and planets form.
As for how much dust there ultimately is in the galaxy, for decades astronomers figured the dustiest places are where stars are forming as it's cosmic dust that makes stars in the first place.
They also suspected that aged stars like those in M15 lose mass to space, but had not witnessed it taking the form of dust until now.
One reason the dust from old stars has been elusive, says Woodward, is that the stars are in clusters that formed at the same time as the Milky Way, 12.5 billion years ago.
That's an awful lot of time for the clusters to bob up and down like a dolphin through the galactic plane.
Spring cleaning the cosmos
On each pass the clusters probably get a good scouring, a sort of spring clean in which the galactic wind clears away the dust.
"[The periodic cleaning] helps explain why people haven't seen it in the past," says Sneden of the dust around old stars.
One of the next steps, says Sneden, will be to look for more cases like M15, just to make sure it's not a fluke.
"I'd like to know how common this is," he says.

Films not only depict environmental concerns, they can contribute to them, according to a new report
Scientists say Hollywood is responsible for creating an unwanted special effect in the skies above Los Angeles: pollution.
A study by the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) Institute of the Environment says the film industry is responsible for sending 140,000 tonnes of pollutants into the atmosphere every year. 
Ozone and diesel emissions from trucks and generators used on movie sets as well as pyrotechnic explosions for special effects contribute to the layer of smog that hangs over Los Angeles. 
"Many industries are moving toward more environmentally sustainable operations, and it's important that we monitor their progress," says institute director and law professor Mary Nichols. 
Nichols says researchers note that although several studios and production companies are taking steps to minimise damage, the industry's lack of a unified environmental strategy is a barrier to improvement. 
Two UCLA professors who conducted an analysis as part of the study conclude that Hollywood could be doing more, the report says. 
"Our overall impression is that, with a few notable and inspiring exceptions, environmental considerations are not high on the agenda in the film and television industry, and that more could be done within the industry to foster environmentally friendly approaches," the professors say.
The researchers cite the example of the makers of The Day After Tomorrow, who paid for a US$200,000 (A$260,000) package of environmental measures to offset damage caused by vehicles used in the 2004 blockbuster. 
The makers of the last two Matrix films were also praised for arranging for more than 97% of set materials to be recycled.
The study found the problem is attributable to the transient nature of production companies.
"The degree to which work is controlled by short-lived ever-changing production companies ... [makes] it difficult to institutionalise best practices," it says.
Business groups warn against using the report to crack down on the film and television industry, which generates around US$29 billion a year in combined revenues and employs around 252,000 people.

The protein soup that makes up semen can trigger serious allergic reactions in some women
Women can become allergic to their partners or other men, according to new research presented this week at a US conference.
The culprit is semen, reports Dr David Resnick, acting director of the Division of Allergy at the New York Presbyterian Hospital.
His research is due to be presented at the annual meeting of the American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology in Philadelphia.
It isn't sperm but its accompanying proteins that can cause an allergic response, a phenomenon that allergy experts are recognising more often, he says.
While there have been no reported deaths from an allergic response to semen, some women may require hospitalisation after experiencing difficulty breathing, hives and swelling.
Less severe cases may result in itching, burning and swelling after intercourse. 
More women may have the reaction than are aware of it, says Resnick. 
"Some women think there's another problem [such as an infection or condom allergy]," Resnick says.
"[But] in one survey, out of 1073 women who sought related information from a researcher, approximately 13% were determined to have a semen allergy."
Sufferers, Resnick explains, produce an antibody that recognises the proteins in a partner's semen.
The antibody triggers a powerful immune response, similar in mild cases to hay fever. Some women are only allergic to the semen of a certain partner, but others react to multiple men.
Other allergens can be transmitted through the seminal fluid.
These include medications such as penicillin, and even some foods and beverages, such as walnuts and soft drinks. Women with other allergies tend to be more prone to semen allergies.
What can we do about it?
Two basic types of treatment are available. The first is similar to standard allergy treatments that expose a sufferer to the allergen in diluted doses. 
The second involves removing other proteins known to sometimes interfere with the desensitisation process from the semen plasma, and then injecting a small amount of the processed semen at regular intervals.
In both cases, frequent sexual contact is needed after the treatment.
"We actually had one case where the male spouse was unable to engage in such frequent intercourse, so his wife developed the allergy again," says Resnick. 
Jonathan Bernstein, a professor of medicine at the University of Cincinnati, and one of the world's leading experts on semen allergies, says he agrees with Resnick.
But he believes that the processed semen, though a more expensive treatment, would be more effective.
Bernstein also believes the allergy is probably underreported.
"It may not be as rare as people think," he says. "The allergy may go unrecognised, yet it can have a significant effect on relationships."

Comets may have caused giant tsunamis much more recently, and much more frequently, than anyone thinks
Enormous comets may have often bombarded our oceans causing tsunamis that dwarf ones seen today, says a small group of scientists.
But most critics are yet to be convinced there's evidence to back claims about such recent, frequent mega-impacts.
Conventional wisdom has it that the Earth suffers such violent hits from space only twice every million years.
But scientists including Australian geomorphologist Associate Professor Ted Bryant of the University of Wollongong have been studying what they say is evidence of massive objects slamming into the Earth's oceans as recently as 500 years ago.
They say these kilometre-wide objects are likely to have been comets.
And Bryant says there have been up to 10 such impacts in the past 10,000 years, based on research with others, including Assistant Professor Dallas Abbott from the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University.
Bryant says these would have caused mega-tsunamis 10 times bigger than the 2004 Asian tsunami, one of the largest earthquake-generated tsunamis the world has ever seen.
"Aceh was a dimple compared to what we're looking at," says Bryant, who is associate dean of science at the university. 
Evidence from Google Earth
Bryant used satellite images from Google Earth to identify inland dunes in the shape of arrowheads that he says are signs of mega-tsunamis.
The tsunamis would have displaced marine deposits containing marine fossils, he says, dumping them inland as 'chevron' dunes.
"We've found that chevrons are everywhere, everywhere around the world's coasts," he says.
Abbot used sea surface altimetry, which measures the height of the sea surface to get an image of the seabed, to identify possible underwater craters, which could be evidence of the impact that caused the tsunamis.
Bryant says Abbot also looked for melted material in cores from the seabed around the craters to confirm impacts caused them. 
The chevrons and craters were linked by the direction the chevrons were pointing.
For example, two chevrons identified 6 kilometres inland from the Gulf of Carpentaria in Australia both pointed north in the direction of two craters found in the Gulf of Carpentaria itself, says Bryant. 
Dating of sediments to the north of the craters suggests the impact happened 1500 years ago, he says, and the well-preserved chevrons also date to around the same time. 
Indian Ocean crater
Bryant says chevrons about 4800 years old around the Indian Ocean are associated with a 29 kilometre wide impact crater located thousands of kilometres to the southeast of Madagascar.
"There are chevrons around the Indian Ocean that all point back to this one crater site," he says.
And he says this is supported by evidence from an anthropologist on the team who found 170 myths and legends from the area dating back about 4000 years referring to an event that could have been the impact.
Bryant says other evidence of a mega-tsunami as recently as 500 years ago has been found on the eastern coast of Australia.
He and Abbott have linked this one to an impact crater south of Stewart Island in New Zealand.
None of the research has been published but some of it will be presented at an American Geophysical Union meeting in San Francisco next month
Mixed reception
Earth scientist Professor Richard Arculus of the Australian National University says he accepts Bryant's evidence of mega-tsunamis.
But he says working out what caused them and when will require more evidence.
His colleague, marine sediment specialist Dr Bradley Opdyke, is also not yet convinced.
"They're heading in the right direction," he says, but believes more evidence is required to prove the existence of the Indian Ocean crater.
New Zealand-based tsunami expert Dr Mauri McSaveney of GNS Science says there is pretty good evidence that there are more large craters on our planet than mainstream scientists think there should be. 
While he says Bryant's claims are "perfectly plausible" and the best available evidence suggests the New Zealand crater is one from the Holocene period, this could still be wrong.
"He has yet to convince me, and a lot of others," says McSaveney.
But as Arculus says, Bryant is fighting against a tradition in earth sciences that suggests everything we see around us is the product of slow processes rather than sudden catastrophic events.
"Geologists are naturally anti-catastrophe," he says. "We're inclined to be conservative."

Size matters, say researchers who are urging more scrutiny of nanotechnology
Urgent research into the potential dangers of nanotechnology needs to be carried to convince the public of its future value in fields such as medicine and computing, scientists urge. 
They believe the potential of nanotechnology, which operates on an atom-sized scale, will not be realised without clear information about the true risks and how to avoid them. 
Dr Andrew Maynard, of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, and 13 other international experts warn that time is running out to get it right.
"If the public loses confidence in the commitment - of governments, business and the science community - to conduct sound and systematic research into possible risks, then the enormous potential of nanotechnology will be squandered. We cannot let that happen," they say in a commentary in the journal Nature.
Nanotechnology is the design and use of particles as small as one-billionth of a metre. A human hair is about 80,000 nanometres across. 
It is already being used in cosmetics, computer chips, sunscreens, self-cleaning windows and stain-resistant clothing. But materials on such a small scale can have different properties to larger versions. 
The experts say instruments to assess environmental exposure to nanomaterials must be developed in the next three to 10 years and that methods are needed within the next 15 years to evaluate the toxicity of nanomaterials.
They also stress the need to develop models within a decade to predict the potential impact of new nanomaterials on health and the environment, and strategic programmes for risk-focused research over the next 12 months. 
"It is about whether governments, industry and scientists around the world are willing to make safe nanotechnology a priority," they add.

Analysis of Neanderthal DNA shows they rarely interbred with our ancestors, as some scientists have suggested
Researchers have sequenced DNA from the leg bone of a Neanderthal man who died 38,000 years ago and say it shows the Neanderthals are truly distant relatives of modern humans who interbred rarely, if at all, with our own immediate ancestors.
They estimate that modern humans and Neanderthals split from a common ancestor at least 370,000 years ago, and possibly 500,000 years ago, although we share 99.95% of our DNA. 
"We see no evidence of mixing 40,000, 30,000 years ago in Europe. We don't exclude it, but see no evidence," says Dr Edward Rubin of the US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute in Walnut Creek, California, who led one study.
This conflicts with some evidence from other researchers, including a team who said earlier this month that humans may have inherited a brain gene from Neanderthals. 
The researchers reported their findings jointly in the journals Nature and Science.
Rubin's team used one method to isolate and sequence part of the Neanderthal's DNA.
Another team, led by Professor Svante Paabo of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany, used a separate method to sequence a much larger amount.
Paabo was the first scientist to find and sequence Neanderthal DNA, in 1997, and first suggested that Neanderthals did not mix with modern humans. 
"I think the sequence data will serve as a DNA time machine that will tell us about biology and aspects that we will never be able to get from their bones and a limited number of associated artefacts," Rubin says. 
Neanderthals and modern humans are both descended from Homo erectus, which left Africa and spread around the world about 1.5 million years ago.
Living side by side
Neanderthals lived in Europe and the Middle East until about 30,000 years ago. Cro-Magnon people, the ancestors of modern humans, started a second wave of migration out of Africa about 10,000 years earlier. 
One huge question is how closely they interacted. Paabo's and Rubin's genetic analysis both suggest there was little sexual contact, at least according to the genes from this one male found at the back of a cave in Croatia. 
Paabo's team sorted through 70 Neanderthal specimens before they found a bone well-preserved enough to provide DNA. They took the tiniest samples they could to preserve the valuable bones. 
They know it was a male because the DNA has the telltale Y chromosome. 
Paabo's team says it hopes to have a complete genetic sequence within two years.
They say the Neanderthal sequences are 99.95% identical to human DNA sequences. This compares to about a 98% similarity between humans and chimpanzees, who split from a common ancestor 6 to 7 million years ago. 
Three-way comparisons among the human, chimpanzee and Neanderthal genomes should shed light on what makes modern humans unique, experts agree. 
Rubin and other experts stress that while full sequences of the human genome are available, very little is understood about what the code actually means.
"We have the book but we haven't yet read it," Rubin says. 
The researchers found, for instance, sequences linked with eye colour but cannot read the code to tell what colour Neanderthal eyes were.

The robot can adapt to changes in both terrain and itself - walking on three legs, for example, if the fourth is lost
A star-shaped robot that senses and responds to changes in the environment and damage to its own body has been developed by US researchers.
Because the robot continually refines its built-in software to move efficiently - wherever it is, and whatever its condition - it could help shape the future of mobile robotics.
The four-legged Starfish robot is reported by Dr Josh Bongard and team from Cornell University in today's issue of the journal Science.
The robot can adapt to changes in both terrain and itself - walking on three legs, for example, if the fourth is lost. 
The Starfish could lead the way for a new generation of autonomous robots that can quickly adjust to unpredictable environments and circumstances, much the same way people and other animals do. 
The technology is "very powerful," says Professor Dario Floreano, director of the Institute of Systems Engineering in Lausanne, Switzerland.
"It's a major advance in the field," says Floreano, who is not associated with the research. 
The software in conventional robots typically doesn't account for unpredictable changes in the environment, or to the robot itself, that could restrict its movement. 
But the Starfish can explore its own abilities and limitations, taking them into account before planning a move. 
Robot sensing
The robot begins by getting a sense of itself, testing each of its joints with random motions. Sensors on the joints capture each joint's range of motion and feed that information to the 15 mathematical models built into its controlling software. 
Each model figures out one possible mode of locomotion. For example, one model might find how the robot is capable of scurrying scorpion-like on three legs, using the fourth like a tail for balance. Another might offer a way for the robot to scuttle sideways like a crab.
Every model may be accurate on some level, but not all are efficient.
To refine the results, a computer program searches through the models, looking for areas of disagreement among their results.
"This is the key element of the entire process," says team member Dr Hod Lipson, director of the Computational Synthesis Laboratory at Cornell University.
The most common disagreements represent the biggest flaws, he says. 
To work out potential kinks in those areas, the robot performs each possible motion where the models disagree, feeding more data about the efficiency of each option back to models. 
The cycle is repeated 16 times, and in the end, the last model standing is the one that instructs the robot where to go, and how. 
Challenges ahead
At the moment, all of the computations are run on a desktop computer. If the robot is to work autonomously, it will need that computing power onboard. 
"That could be a potential challenge," says Floreano, especially if the robot is equipped with many sensors. 
But he feels certain that the Cornell team has a solution and expressed confidence in the flexibility of the approach, which "can be applied to any type of robot."

Many people have protested over the use of animals in experiments
The use of lab animals to develop new medicines, cosmetics and pesticides could be eliminated by virtual experiments on computer, say European researchers.
The virtual tests could be run using computer models that draw on a vast database of information about chemical compounds.
And the system could also help develop new compounds in record time, the researchers say.
Developing new chemical compounds consists of multiple steps, from identifying an active chemical among millions of potential leads to pinpointing a target.
Finding an effective chemical requires a lot of mixing and matching of compounds in the lab. 
But access to a centralised database of chemical candidates under development, known as Chemomentum, could help researchers save some lab time, and lab animals.
Modelling tools available in the software could be used to optimise the chemical structure of the compound and analyse whether those changes make it interact better or worse with a potential target.
Once the right chemical compound is pinpointed, it needs to be tested for effectiveness as well as toxicity. Classic toxicity tests are done by exposing animals to increasing doses of a chemical.
At a low dose no effect is seen; at a high dose, all animals die. The right dose is somewhere in between. Based on such animal tests, the lethal dose of a chemical is extrapolated to humans.
According to the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection, 100 million animals are used in laboratories to tests range of goods, including household products, cosmetics, food additives, pharmaceuticals, and industrial and agricultural chemicals, to name a few.
Mathilde Romberg, a research fellow at the University of Ulster in the UK and one of the principal investigators on the Chemomentum project, hopes the new system can reduce those numbers.
Romberg has partnered with experts at eight universities, institutes and companies from France, Germany, Italy, Estonia and Switzerland to compile the system.
She says the user-friendly program should "help the chemical industry and European regulatory bodies evaluate the substances and assess related risks, with fewer and fewer animal tests."
In theory, experimental tests may not be necessary with Chemomentum. Rather, users would input information about the leads and targets they are interested in and the system would return the corresponding toxicity predictions.
The software will be designed to perform calculations using standard PCs or draw upon the computing power of PC clusters - also known as grid computing - to crunch more complex data expeditiously.
At the moment, the models that predict toxicity are new and people are sceptical about using them, said Paolo Mazzatorta, a scientist in the Chemical Food Safety Group at Nestl&eacute; Research Center in Lausanne, Switzerland.
But experimental tests are expensive and that could eventually drive more interest in predictive modelling.
"I think there will come a moment when this science will be more mature and it will be used," he says.

Researchers are trying to find out more about paranormal experiences
An international online survey of paranormal experiences has met with an overwhelming response, say Australian researchers.
The survey, on phenomena that cannot be explained using the current laws of science, is by researchers at Monash University in Melbourne.
"The paranormal is covered by the media everyday. It is also in the public domain via chatrooms and websites and email lists," says Rosemary Breen, who will use the survey results as part of a Masters degree. 
"I wanted to tap into this and give a scholarly voice to these experiences."
A recent Gallup poll revealed that 75% of Americans hold at least one paranormal belief, and a UK newspaper poll showed that 60% of Britons accept the existence of the paranormal, say the researchers.
But little is known about contemporary spontaneous experiences, and official surveys are rare, they say.
Breen says the survey is not about beliefs or whether parapsychological phenomena exist, rather it is about what people have experienced and the impact it has had on their lives.
And she says she is not aware of any equivalent study in the world.
Thousands of responses
Some 2,000 people have made contact via the internet since the survey began six weeks ago, says Dr Beverley Jane, who is supervising Breen's research.
She says 96% of respondents claim to have had at least one brush with the paranormal,
The exercise seeks to gauge the frequency, effect and age of onset of unexplained phenomena such as premonitions, out-of-body and near-death episodes, telepathy and apparitions. 
Results to date showed 70% of respondents believe an unexplained event changed their lives, mostly in a positive way. 
Some 70% also claim to have seen, heard or been touched by animal or person that wasn't there, 80% report having had a premonition, and almost 50% recalled a previous life. 
"The respondents are sincere and they want to report what they have experienced," Jane says. 
She is amazed by the strong response on such a sensitive subject, and put this down to the virtual nature of the study.
"People can do it in the privacy of their homes instead of in front of the researcher, so they can answer honestly," she says.
While the survey was anonymous, some people later sent emails with their contact details, Jane says. 
She says the study is not seeking to assess respondents' mental health, but says it does offer people the chance to tell somebody about experiences they would normally keep to themselves.
Due to the overwhelming response to the survey the researchers expect to extend the closing date for responses past its initial November deadline.

Massage may make baby happier, but the evidence to date suggests it won't improve physical or emotional development
A gentle massage appears to lower levels of stress hormones in unsettled babies, but there's no evidence that infant massage has any benefit on growth or development, a scientific analysis shows.
Infant massage has long been used in many Asian and African cultures to ease colic and crying, help babies sleep, and even aid their growth and development. 
There has also been growing interest in infant massage among parents in Western countries. 
UK researchers seeking to assess the science behind the practice analysed 23 clinical trials.
They report their findings in the latest issue of The Cochrane Library, a publication of the Cochrane Collaboration, an international organisation that evaluates medical research.
The trials involved infants aged six months and under who were randomly assigned to receive massage or not.
The researchers found that across nine of the studies, gentle massage appeared to improve infants' sleep patterns, ease crying, and strengthen mother-child bonding. 
Some studies found that massage reduced babies' levels of the stress hormones norepinephrine and epinephrine and appeared to release melatonin, which is associated with sleep patterns.
Given this apparent hormonal effect, it's "not surprising" that massage seemed to improve sleep and crying, according to the researchers, led by Dr Angela Underdown of the University of Warwick in Coventry, England. 
Tentative support
But the nine studies failed to come up with any evidence of cognitive or behavioural benefits.
"There is no evidence of any impact on infant attachment, temperament, psychomotor or mental development," the researchers say.
Overall, the results offer "tentative support" for teaching parents and caregivers infant massage, the investigators conclude.
But they say there isn't enough evidence to universally recommend the practice.
The trials included in the review were conducted in China, North America, Great Britain and Israel, and included 598 healthy, full-term infants. 
In some studies, researchers provided the massage, while parents did in others.
Most looked at the effects of daily massage over a period of weeks. 
The researchers said 14 of the 23 trials they looked at were not entirely reliable because of concerns about their methodology.
For example, some lacked information about how the study was designed and conducted, meaning more quality research is needed. 
It's also unclear how often, when or for how long babies should receive massage to get the most benefits. 
Underdown and colleagues recommend that future studies examine these questions.

New research suggests that whale communication is even more sophisticated than previously thought
Whales have such a broad vocal repertoire that they can call to their young, woo potential mates and even express emotions, according to researchers who have identified 622 social sounds in humpback whales.
Their work will be presented at the upcoming joint meetings of the Acoustical Society of America and the Acoustical Society of Japan in Hawaii.
Social sounds are brief, unpatterned noises that are distinct from lengthier, complex whale songs.
The new research adds to a growing body of evidence that whales convey more meaning through vocalisations than previously thought.
"I wouldn't say (whales possess) language, as that's a human term," says Dr Rebecca Dunlop, a researcher in the School of Veterinary Sciences at the University of Queensland, who worked on the study.
"Whales don't string these sounds together like words and form sentences. It's more like a simple vocabulary," she says.
The scientists visually tracked 60 pods of whales migrating along the east coast of Australia.
The researchers used a static hydrophone array, sensitive equipment that detects sound waves, linking the whale sounds to various activities and contexts.
Wops, thwops and yaps
They identified 622 distinct sounds, which fell into 35 basic types.
These include "wops" made by females, "thwops" made by males, "yaps" made when pods split, and high pitched cries that appeared to express anger.
In addition to vocalisations, the researchers found that whales send messages through body language, by breaching the surface, slapping water with their tails and blowing underwater bubbles.
Famous for their long, complex songs, whales also sometimes "speak" short song units individually instead of singing them.
Males especially seem to do this when trying to woo a female.
"Song is a loud broadcast signal and two singers singing at the same time is bound to be confusing to the receiver," Dunlop says.
"If he's trying to attract a female, but doesn't want his signal confused with another singer in the area, then using song units in this case might be the way forward."
She thinks one reason whales are so vocal is because sound travels better in water than light, and so sight is less useful to whales than hearing.
Human interference
Dr Christopher Clark, director of the Bioacoustics Research Program at Cornell University, conducted a similar study on right whales.
He says that just as researchers are gaining a better understanding of whale vocalisations, humans are creating so much ocean noise, through shipping, oil and gas exploration, recreational traffic and more, that we often prevent whales from communicating.
"Many whales have very traditional feeding grounds and their migratory routes occur along shallow coastlines, which are now some of the noisiest, most heavily impacted habitats," he says.
"The ocean area over which a whale can communicate and listen today has shriveled down to a small fraction of what it was less than a century ago."

Scientists say they can genetically engineer cotton plants to remove a toxic compound, making cottonseed fit for humans to eat
Scientists say they have found a way of using the cotton plant to feed potentially half a billion people a year.
Texas A&M University plant biotechnologist Associate Professor Keerti Rathore and colleagues report they have genetically altered the plant to reduce the levels of the toxic chemical gossypol in cottonseed, making it fit for humans to eat.
"It actually tastes pretty good. It reminds me of chickpea. It's a fairly good-tasting seed," he says. 
"It tasted better than soybean, I can tell you that," adds Rathore, who publishes the team's research in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The protein-rich, GM cottonseed could be ground into a flour and made into bread and other foods, he says. 
Rathore and his team turned to a technique also being used in cancer and AIDS research.
They used so-called RNAi or RNA interference technology that can 'silence' a gene to cut the amount of gossypol in the cottonseed.
When humans eat gossypol it can damage their heart and liver. 
The researchers left gossypol intact in the rest of the plant because it guards against insects and disease. 
"So the trick is not to affect the levels of these compounds in the rest of the plant, but eliminate it from the seed only. And that's what we have done," Rathore says. 
This cottonseed could serve as a high-protein food for the world's hungry, and falls well within the criteria set by the World Health Organization and US Food and Drug Administration for food consumption, the researchers say.
"Potentially, if all of the cottonseed today which is produced can be utilised for human nutrition directly, it can meet the protein requirements of 500 million people on an annual basis," Rathore says. 
Wasted protein
"That is a lot of protein right now really being wasted," he adds, noting that cottonseed often is fed to cattle because bacteria in their stomachs can break down gossypol.
The chemical is present naturally within the glands in the above-ground parts of the cotton plant. 
For millennia, people have spun cotton fibres into clothing and other fabrics. But for each kilogram of cotton fibre, the plant produces 1.6 kilograms of seed, Rathore says.
Cotton is grown in more than 80 countries worldwide. With the exception of the US and Australia, he says, it is grown primarily in developing countries.
Researchers estimate that it will take at least another decade to develop cotton varieties with these qualities for broad commercial production. 
In the 1950s and 1960s, agricultural scientists bred cotton varieties that had no gossypol glands. But they were a commercial flop because the absence of the toxin made the plants too vulnerable to insects and disease. 
In addition to edible cottonseed, the RNAi technique might be applied to other crops with toxic components, such as fava beans, to increase their use, the researchers say.

Firefighters face long-term health risks, new research shows
Firefighters appear to have higher-than-average rates of cancer, the largest study of its kind shows. 
The analysis, of 32 previous studies, shows that firefighters are at greater risk of prostate and testicular cancers, as well as the immune system cancers non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and multiple myeloma.
Eight additional cancers show possible links to the job, according to findings published in the Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine. 
Firefighters are exposed to many potentially cancer-causing chemicals released from burning materials.
Though they wear breathing apparatus and other protective equipment while fighting fires, researchers point out, they typically remove the gear when they're merely in the vicinity of the fire. 
At the scene of the fire, toxic substances such as benzene, lead, uranium and asbestos can be inhaled or absorbed through the skin. And at the fire station, idling trucks expose firefighters to diesel exhaust. 
The cancer risks seen in this latest study suggest that firefighters need better on-the-job protection, according to the study authors. 
"Firefighters work in an inherently dangerous occupation on a daily basis," says lead author Dr Grace LeMasters of the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine.
She and her colleagues based their findings on an analysis of 32 international studies that included more than 110,000 firefighters in all. 
Across the studies, firefighters had double the risk of testicular cancer as men in other occupations, a 50% higher risk of both multiple myeloma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and a 28% higher risk of prostate cancer. 
These findings "raise red flags", LeMasters and her colleagues write, and point to a need for "innovative comfortable protective equipment allowing firefighters to do their job without compromising their health". 
Another, more immediate measure would be for firefighters to shower as soon as they return to the fire station, the researchers say.
Other investigators, they note, have found that firefighters often say their skin ends up covered in soot after battling a blaze.

Male chimps fight over older females, who are seen as a prize catch
Chimpanzee males prefer to have sex with older females, according to US researchers, showing one of the biggest behavioural differences between humans and our closest biological relatives.
Male chimps will chase down and fight over the oldest females.
Meanwhile, the youngest female chimps are forced to beg for masculine attention, say anthropologist Assistant Professor Martin Muller and colleagues at Boston University. 
"It's really dramatic because it's not just that the old chimps are avoiding the youngest adult females. They actually have a strong preference for the older mothers," Muller says. 
Writing in the journal Current Biology, Muller and colleagues say they studied chimpanzees living in the Kanyawara community of Kibale National Park in Uganda. 
It is easy to observe their mating behaviour. 
"Chimpanzee copulations are frequently preceded by a series of male courtship signals (eg, glancing with erect penis and branch shaking), after which either the male or the female approaches the other to mate," the researchers write. 
They also collected the chimps' urine to test for various hormones that demonstrate fertility. 
The researchers were checking to see if chimpanzees behave like humans, their closest living relatives, who form long-term mating bonds and who value younger females. 
This is most definitely not the case with chimps. The very oldest adult females were the most sought after. 
"The males fight over them more," Muller says. 
"They don't have to do anything to get the males interested. The males find them. They follow them around. If you look at the very youngest females, the males will mate with them but it does take more work on the female's part." 
Showing off
Also unlike humans, female chimpanzees actively advertise when they are fertile, with bright red swellings around the genital area.
And unlike human females, chimpanzees apparently remain fertile their entire lives, although these wild Ugandan chimpanzees rarely lived beyond the age of 40.
Muller says that older female chimpanzees are more dominant socially and have access to better food. 
"The females that have access to the most food are the most fecund, the most likely to conceive in any cycle," he says. And males may know that.
Older females may also be better mothers, the researchers guess. 
"The males do end up mating with all the females for the most part," Muller notes. But he says the study challenges common conceptions. 
"Normally, I think peoples' default assumption is, 'Well other animals, they must also find young females attractive'," Muller says. "And people assume that young females are more fertile than older females." 
But female chimpanzees do not experience the rapid decline in fertility that is seen in human females after their 20s.

What happens to tissue that's removed during a biopsy and stored in liquid nitrogen?
Some Australians are concerned that tissue samples held by hospitals could be used to make human clones, a survey of public attitudes towards tissue banking reveals.
Early findings from the study, by researchers from the Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine at the University of Sydney, show some people are also opposed to biopsy tissue, such as cut-out tumours, being used as a source of stem cells or by drug companies.
Most hospitals have a collection of tissue that's been removed for diagnosis and serves as a research resource.
The tissue can be used for in-house research or passed on to other institutions and private companies.
But the laws relating to stored tissue are confusing and contradictory because of differences between state and federal jurisdictions, says Bronwen Morrell, who will present the study's interim findings at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne this week.
She says her study indicates that people want laws setting down basic parameters about consent, information about the type of research and whether their tissue can be used for profit.
Morrell asked participants a range of questions including whether there was any sort of research they wouldn't want their tissue used for.
"Two things that came up repeatedly were cloning and stem cells," she says.
"Cloning came up repeatedly, which is interesting because I think they were thinking of reproductive cloning which isn't allowed in Australia anyway ... but obviously that's something that's very much on their mind."
The federal government is currently debating recommendations of the Lockhart Review to allow therapeutic cloning in Australia, but reproductive cloning remains banned.
Morrell says the study also shows some people trust the public sector more with their tissue than private companies.
"As long as research was being done in a public hospital they would feel comfortable with that," she says.
"But if it was a private company doing the research, especially drug companies, they wouldn't be that happy."
Some people also wanted any profit made out of their tissue to go back into research, she says.
Dr Wendy Lipworth, who was involved in the research, says that genetic technology has raised new issues for tissue banks.
"I think 30 or 40 years ago nobody would have thought anything of it, they would have thought why would I care, it's just the leftover bits of my tumour," she says.
"But as genetic technology has evolved you can find out more and do more with that material. There wasn't as much at stake until recently."
Recommendations
The current survey is part of a three-part study into in the ethics of tumour banking.
The first part of the study, published in the Journal of Law and Medicine this year, surveyed hospitals and private research institutions.
The second part, which questioned experts and medical professionals, is still being analysed.
The third and final part subjected 20 people including patients, parents, consumer representatives and health advocates to a in-depth one hour interview.
Morrell says researchers hope to publish a series of reports when the results are fully analysed.
The researchers may also make recommendations about the sorts of procedures that tissue banks should follow, Worrell says.

Scientists say they haven't heard from the Mars Global Surveyor in weeks
NASA scientists conceded that the 10-year-old Mars Global Surveyor is probably lost in space after the US agency tried unsuccessfully for two weeks to make contact.
The spacecraft, the oldest of five NASA robotic explorers studying Mars, was circling the planet snapping high-resolution images and studying the climate.
It was on a mission that led to the first evidence that water once flowed on the planet's surface. 
The probe went silent after reporting problems with a sticky solar panel, and scans of the skies have produced no sign of it. 
"[Mars Global Surveyor] was a fantastic mission. It has really revolutionised how we look at Mars," says Dr Fuk Li, Mars Exploration Program manager.
"We haven't given up hope, but we are all ready to celebrate a long life and a job well done." 
One chance remained this week to recover the probe, which has been programmed to transmit a signal to NASA's robotic geology station, Opportunity, located near Mars' equator. 
Opportunity will relay any signal from the orbiter to Earth during passes this week via the Mars Odyssey. 
"If [Mars Global Surveyor] is in the sky and its [transmitter] is on, then Opportunity should receive it," says Dr John Callas, project manager for the Mars Exploration Rover mission.
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, lost contact with the spacecraft on 2 November after it signalled it was having trouble moving one of its solar panels to track the Sun as it emerged from behind Mars.
The spacecraft is programmed to position itself so that a stuck panel faces the Sun, but that orientation could block its communication with mission controllers, says Tom Thorpe, the Mars Global Surveyor project manager.
Power problem
If Mars Global Surveyor is turned away from the Sun for more than a few orbits it could be low on power, an outcome that seemed to be supported by the spacecraft's apparent failure to respond to commands that would raise its transmitter, Thorpe says.
"We don't believe the [solar] panel is in any way degraded ... the problem seems to be the gimble motor that is sticking," Thorpe says. "Why we can't raise the transmitter could be a function of the power problem." 
Mission scientists first hailed the orbiter via the Deep Space Network, receiving what they believed was a weak carrier signal from the probe two or three days into the search. Then it went silent. 
They then turned to the newly arrived Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, which used its onboard cameras during recent passes near Mars Global Surveyor's last known orbit. But that probe had no definitive sightings of its sister craft. 
If Opportunity records no sign of Mars Global Surveyor, scientists say they will have exhausted the most likely possibilities for contacting it.
The 10-year mission, which was extended four times, cost a relatively modest US$377 million (A$489 million). 
Mars Global Surveyor's cameras were the first to record topographic features suggesting flowing water on Mars, and its magnometer found the remains of magnetic fields that once shielded Mars' surface from deadly cosmic rays. 
Its mineral mapping helped scientists choose landing sites for Opportunity and its twin, Spirit, and will be used to evaluate landing sites for the next-generation of Mars surface probes, the Phoenix and the Mars Science Laboratory.

Tall men have the advantage when it comes to speed-dating
If you want to be a big hit at speed-dating, walk tall, say UK scientists.
Their survey found that taller men are more likely to get a date.
The University of Essex scientists calculated that for every 2.5 centimetres taller a man is than his speed-dating rivals, the number of women who want to meet him goes up by about 5%.
Dr Michele Belot and Dr Marco Francesconi analysed the choices made by 1800 men and 1800 women at 84 speed-dating events. 
They found that women prefer men who are young and tall, while men are more attracted to women who are young and thin.
"What we try to show is that there is a pattern in how people choose each other," says Belot. 
But she readily concedes that science does not have the answer to all affairs of the heart.
"It is true we can explain quite a lot, but there is still a part that is unexplained. That is where love will play a role," she says. 
But, in the unforgiving numbers game of love, age is crucial. 
Each extra year, in comparison with others in the speed-dating group, reduces a man's chance of finding a partner by 4%. For women it is 5%. 
And it is often all about the luck of the draw on the big night.
Should a man of average height turn up at the speed-dating event, all is not lost. 
If all his male rivals are short, then women may decide that he does measure up after all. 
"We also found that an overweight woman is 16% less likely to receive a proposal from men. Men, on the other hand do not seem to be penalised for being overweight," Belot says. 
The survey also explodes the myth that blondes have more fun. Hair colour was not a major issue when speed-dating.
And when the big night was over, women were much pickier than men, choosing only 2.6 men as possible future dates.
To add insult to injury, almost half of the women said they did not want to see any of the men again.

Green turtle returning to the sea after laying a clutch of eggs on the beach at Enu Island in Indonesia
Scientists have conducted the first genetic census of endangered green turtles throughout southeast Asia and Australia, providing a conservation tool.
"The green turtle is on the red list of endangered species internationally, so we wanted to be able to identify if there were particular groups that might need specific conservation efforts," says PhD student Kiki Dethmers from the University of Queensland.
Her work on the turtle Chelonia mydas appears in the November issue of the journal Molecular Ecology.
Turtle populations are shrinking for a range of reasons, she says.
Some are hunted for food, others are accidentally caught in fishing nets, while others still are affected by a loss of habitat or viral diseases.
Dethmers and her colleagues gathered skin or blood samples from turtles nesting at 27 different sites in Malaysia, the Philippines, Micronesia, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and Australia.
From each sample they extracted a mitochondrial DNA, genetic material that is passed down from mother to child.
"Mitochondrial DNA is inherited through the female line, and females come to the beaches to nest, so our study was based on sampling the female population," Dethmers says.
The results show that there are just 17 distinct genetic groups within the region.
Some groups were made up of a single nesting beach. But in other cases, nesting sites in different locations turn out to be genetically related.
Some of the groups were substantial, such as the 125,000 related turtles that nest on Western Australia's northwest shelf.
Others, like some groups in Malaysia, might contain just a few hundred turtles.
The information Dethmers and her colleagues have gathered could be vital for future conservation efforts.
"The turtles' situation varies from one area to another," she says. "Our data would be useful for example if one of the groups is particularly threatened, because it would give you an idea of how many turtles are being affected.
"This can help you make predictions about whether that is going to make a certain population go extinct."

Cooling towers are one option for getting rid of waste heat from power plants
Any Australian nuclear power plants would most likely need to be built on the coast where gigalitres of seawater could be used to cool them, suggest experts.
"Because we've got a water shortage in this country it would be best to place them on the coast," says nuclear power engineer Professor John Price of Monash University in Melbourne.
Price's comments come in the wake of a draft report from Prime Minister John Howard's nuclear taskforce that proposes constructing 25 nuclear power plants to meet Australia's future energy needs.
Price, who welcomes the new report, says "gigantic" amounts of water are required to cool a nuclear power station.
"I'm talking about tonnes per second," says Price, who has designed nuclear power stations in the UK.
According to the taskforce, headed by nuclear physicist Dr Ziggy Switkowski, nuclear power plants are less efficient than coal-fired plants and thus require more cooling.
One estimate, from a recent report to the Queensland government, suggests a 1400 megawatt nuclear power station would use around 25 gigalitres of water a year.
This is about 1.26 times the water used by an equivalent coal-fired power station, says the report by Dr Ian Rose of Roam Consulting, a Queensland-based company with expertise in energy modelling.
Water cooling
While the Switkowski report does not consider specific locations for nuclear power plants in Australia, it says they are often located near existing power stations because this ensures ready access to appropriate infrastructure and water for cooling.
Most nuclear power stations are cooled using water from a river, lake or the ocean, the report says.
But the Rose report says a lack of reliable river water makes a nuclear power station cooled by river water "not an option for Australian conditions".
Both Rose and Price also raise the issue of environmental effects of the warmer water discharged from nuclear power stations on rivers.
"I wouldn't think that would be a good idea [siting a nuclear power station on a river] in Australia because the river volumes are not huge and you don't want to heat the river up," says Price.
Price suggests power stations by the sea are preferable because the sea can more easily dilute the heat of the discharge.
But Rose says it may be difficult to find suitable seaside locations.
"The number of seaboard nuclear sites in areas close to a major transmission grid in eastern Australia is likely to be limited," his report says.
The US Environmental Protection Agency says that discharge from nuclear power stations can also contain heavy metals and salts that can harm aquatic life.
It also says removal of water upstream in the first place can also damage river environments.
Cooling options
Instead of discharging warm water, some nuclear power stations evaporate water into the air through cooling towers, Price says. 
While Rose says this is a preferred option, Price says this is a waste of water.
According to the Switkowski and Rose reports, it is also possible to use 'dry' cooling, which reduces water consumption by using air as a coolant. But they say this would be more expensive.
Another option, says Price, is to use waste heat from nuclear power stations to desalinate water.
"That may be one of the most interesting outputs, as far as Australia is concerned," he says.
The nuclear taskforce is inviting public submissions on its draft report until 12 December and the final report is due at the end of the year.

Left-handed people seem to have better connections between the left and right halves of their brain. So does this mean they are better at complex tasks like gaming?
Left-handed people often perform better than right-handers at fast or difficult tasks that involve lots of information or stimuli, new research suggests.
For instance left-handers might be better at playing fast computer games, talking while driving in heavy traffic and piloting a jet fighter - activities that need both hemispheres of the brain to process information.
Research shows that the left and right hemispheres communicate and work together better in left-handers, as information transfers from one to the other slightly faster and perhaps more efficiently.
Dr Nick Cherbuin from the Australian National University and colleagues report their findings in the November issue of the journal Neuropsychology.
He says the left-hander's brain is wired slightly differently to the right-hander's as it tends to be more symmetrical with larger and perhaps faster connections between hemispheres.
The research found that on average those with faster connections were more efficient at performing tasks that require processing in two hemispheres.
"Typically we tend to use more our two hemispheres together  when tasks are very fast or very hard and one hemisphere does not have enough resources to cope," Cherbuin says. 
"Examples might be dealing with multiple stimuli that are presented very briefly or tasks which require interpretation of a lot of information such as talking while driving in heavy traffic, piloting a jet fighter or playing fast computer games.
"As our brain ages we lose processing resources in the two hemispheres but left-handers may be able to cope better because the sharing of resource across their hemispheres is more efficient."
The computer tests in 80 right and 20 left-handers measured how fast information transferred between hemispheres by hitting a button to indicate whether a light flash was left or right of a dot.
Another test to match letters found left-handers performed better when letters flashed on both sides of the dot, requiring collaboration across hemispheres.
Right-handers did better when letters were on the same side of the dot, making them more efficient at single hemisphere processing. 
Cherbuin, a right-hander, says the 7-10% of people who are left-handed adjust to our right-handed world by using their right hand more.

Superimposing copy number profiles of different human genomes shows each chromosome has distinctive pattern of DNA gains (shown in green) and losses (red). Yellow areas show where there is no difference
New investigations into the code for life suggest the assumption that humans are genetically almost identical is wide of the mark, and the implications could be resounding. 
Current thinking, inspired by the results five years ago from the Human Genome Project, is that the 6 billion humans alive today are 99.9% similiar when it comes to genetic content and identity.
But research published today in the journal Nature suggests we are genetically more diverse.
The repercussions could be far-reaching for medical diagnosis, new drugs and the tale of human evolution itself, the researchers say. 
Until now, analysis of the genome has focused overwhelmingly on comparing differences, or polymorphisms, in the patterns of single letters in the chemical code for making and sustaining human life.
But an international consortium of scientists has taken a different tack and believes it has uncovered a complex, higher-order variation in the code. 
This better explains why some individuals are vulnerable to certain diseases and respond well to specific drugs, while others swiftly fall sick or never respond to treatment, the authors believe.
Their focus has been to dig out deletions or duplications of code among relatively long sequences of individual DNA and then compare these so-called copy number variations (CNVs) across a range of volunteers of different ancestry. 
The researchers were astonished to locate 1447 CNVs in nearly 2900 genes, or around one eighth of the human genetic code.
"Each one of us has a unique pattern of gains and losses of complete sections of DNA," says Dr Matthew Hurles of the UK's Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, one of the project's partners.
"One of the real surprises of these results was just how much of our DNA varies in copy number. We estimate this to be at least 12% of the genome.
"The copy number variation that researchers had seen before was simply the tip of the iceberg, while the bulk lay submerged, undetected. We now appreciate the immense contribution of this phenomenon to genetic differences between individuals." 
Some of the missing or duplicated stretches are very long, suggesting that, like backroom switches in a protein factory, CNVs must have a big impact on gene expression.
Genetic diseases
Nearly 16% of genes that are known to be related to disease have CNVs, the group found.
These include genes involved in rare genetic disorders such as DiGeorge, Williams-Beuren and Prader-Willi syndromes and those linked with schizophrenia, cataracts, spinal muscular atrophy and atherosclerosis. 
But kidney disease, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and vulnerability to malaria and HIV, which recent research has blamed on  single-letter variations in the gene code, may also well be rooted in CNVs, the scientists believe. 
"The stage is set for global studies to explore anew ... the clinical significance of human variation," say Professor Huntington Willard and Dr Kevin Shianna of the Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy at Duke University in North Carolina, in a review of the research.
How about evolution?
Evolution is another area that will come under new scrutiny. 
The Out of Africa scenario, by which Homo sapiens emerged from east Africa and spread around the globe, will not be challenged, though. 
Our origins are so recent that the vast majority of CNVs, around 89%, was found to be shared among the 269 people who volunteered blood as samples for the study.
These individuals included Japanese people from Tokyo, Han Chinese from Beijing, Yoruba from Nigeria and Americans of northern and western European ancestry.
All the same, there are widespread differences in CNVs according to the three geographical origins of the samples. 
This implies that, over the past 200,000 years or so, subtle variants have arisen in the genome to allow different populations of humans adapt to their different environments, according to scientists at Wellcome Trust Sanger.
The research is based on two technical advances, one in faster, accurate sequencing of DNA and the other in a powerful software programme to spot the CNVs.

The first supernova, ringed on the right in the image, was detected in June and the second supernova, on the left, in November. The central bright spot is the galaxy core and the bright object to the far left, like an earring, is a foreground star
Stars are blowing themselves to smithereens more often than usual in galaxy NGC 1316.
Astronomers have stumbled across two supernovae letting loose there just months apart, in addition to two previous mega-blasts in the past 26 years. 
That makes the rate of exploding stars in NGC 1316 many times higher than any other known galaxy.
The NASA Swift satellite observatory detected the recent twin supernovae on 19 June and 5 November of this year.
In the images, the supernovae are visible on either side of the bright galaxy centre. 
"It is actually very puzzling," says Professor Neil Gehrels, a Swift investigator at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center.
"That's the most [supernovae] there have ever been in such a short time."
A more typical rate is around one a century in a given galaxy.
So what makes NGC 1316 different? Not a lot, at least so far as researchers can tell.
It's a large elliptical galaxy about 80 million light-years away, believed to have recently collided and merged with a spiral galaxy, which may have something to do with the accelerated rate of supernovae, or not.
Galactic mergers are believed to stir up cosmic dust in a way that can create supermassive stars, the sort that eventually explode as supernovae.
But the supernovae in NGC 1316 have the spectral fingerprints of type 1A supernovae, which begin as small, dying white dwarf stars rather than supermassive ones.
There's no reason to believe that a galactic merger would create a larger number of white dwarfs than normal. So the mystery continues.
Baby boomers
Another possible explanation is that there are an inordinate number of white dwarfs in NGC 1316, which are the corpses of an extraordinary 'baby boom' of stars in NGC 1316.
If that's the case, a surge of white dwarf-triggered supernovae would be expected when all the 'boomer generation' stars reach a similar age. 
On the other hand, it could just be chance.
Of the thousands of observable galaxies, odds are in favour of an occasional random clustering of supernovae in one galaxy, says John Nousek, a professor of astronomy and astrophysics at Pennsylvania State University.
"This sort of thing is more of a cosmic coincidence than a cosmic Rosetta stone," says Nousek.
He and graduate student Peter Brown have been hard at work monitoring and trying to make sense of the double explosions. 
"The exact mechanism is not well understood," says Gehrels. "This is a fairly hot topic."

Silicon has been converted into a superconductor, but at very low temperatures. If this could be reproduced at room temperatures, then we could build super-efficient computer circuit boards
Scientists say they have treated silicon, the material of choice for semiconductors, so that it paradoxically becomes a superconductor, a material that offers no resistance.
This potentially has huge uses in the efficient transfer of energy, whether that's on a large scale like electronic cables or on a smaller scale, like in a computer chip.
But superconductivity in the treated silicon occurs only at 0.3&deg;K, or 0.3&deg;C above absolute zero.
This means the novel material has no practical use and is only of theoretical interest right now.
Dr Etienne Bustarret of France's National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS) in Grenoble and colleagues converted the silicon by 'doping' it with high levels of boron, using a pulsed laser at normal pressure.
They publish their research today in the journal Nature alongside a commentary that describes the findings as "a breakthrough".
Superconductivity has been found in only a number of materials which, at very cold temperatures, allow electricity to flow through them without offering any resistance or losing some of the energy as heat.
Scientific but also industrial interest in superconductors is huge, as superconductive cable and dynamos would be many times more energy-efficient than traditional copper and other conductors. 
In addition, superconductor computers could be many times faster than today's.
Their semiconductors would not be hampered by heat, one of the biggest problems facing designers today who are tasked with crowding ever more circuits onto a chip.
Exotic oxides, cooled by liquid nitrogen, have provided the best transition temperatures to superconductivity, with temperatures as high as 160&deg;K.

Stripes on the shoulder of this basketball jersey light up for each foul the player commits
An Australian researcher has developed a sports jersey that lights up to show players' goals or fouls, and how much time they have left to play.
The jersey is called TeamAwear and is the brainchild of design computing student Mitchell Page of the University of Sydney.
In fast-scoring games like basketball it can be quite hard to keep up-to-date with constantly changing statistics that help you understand what's going on, says Page.
While some information is posted on the scoreboard this can be difficult to look at during the game.
Page decided that displaying information on players' jerseys would be a good idea because these are at the centre of the game.
"Everyone's focus is directed towards them," he says.
And the jerseys could display real-time information on individual players that is generally not publicly available.
Page developed a basketball jersey with displays made out of electroluminescent panels that light up when electricity flow through them. These are connected by conductive thread woven into the jersey.
A microcontroller communicates via a wireless connection to a computer at the bench, where someone can input the detailed information as required.
There are four stripes over the jersey's shoulder that light up as the number of fouls increase and three bars on the side of the jersey each representing 10 goals.
Two bars on the front of the jersey warn the player when they are nearly out of time. 
One warns when the game is nearly up and the other warns when they need to shoot without incurring a penalty.
And panels on the back, mainly for the benefit of the spectators, light up to show the winning side.
Page says when players tested the jerseys they found they were comfortable to wear and improved play by giving them immediate access to more information.
He says the players found the displays intuitive and easy to understand without being distracting.
The warning lights on the front were the most important. If it was a tight game they could pick up pace. But if a player had a lot of fouls, they would have to play conservatively.
Players might also choose the displays to choose a high-scoring player to pass the ball to.
Page says the jerseys also had an unexpected effect on players' psychology.
"Athletes said they were more confident when they could see that they had high points or they could see that they were winning," he says.
The coach and referee can also use the displays to choose who to keep on the court, without having to refer to the benches and scoreboards as often, says Page.
Page says while slow sports like golf would probably not benefit from his jersey, he hopes the idea can be applied to other team activities.
He says it might be useful for emergency service personnel working in noisy, chaotic environments where verbal communication is difficult.
Teams of people with hearing disabilities, debaters and possibly even orchestra members, might also benefit from the technology, says Page.

Wild emmer wheat, shown here, is more nutritious than some types of domestic wheat. So scientists have crossbred new and old strains to improve levels of protein, zinc and iron
Scientists have found a way to boost wheat's nutrient content by reintroducing a gene that was 'lost' over the years as the wild plant was domesticated.
Writing in the journal Science, the researchers say they used conventional breeding methods to bring the gene into cultivated wheat varieties, enhancing their protein, zinc and iron value.
The gene, which Professor Jorge Dubcovsky from the University of California, Davis and colleagues have identified, has became nonfunctional for unknown reasons over the years.
This occurred as humans cultivated the wild wheat, known as wild emmer wheat (Triticum turgidum ssp dicoccoides).
Wheat represents one of the major crops feeding people worldwide, providing about 20% of all calories consumed.
The World Health Organization says that upward of 2 billion people get too little zinc and iron in their diet, and more than 160 million children under the age of 5 lack adequate protein. 
"We really can produce wheat with more protein and more zinc and iron," Dubcovsky says.
"So if that is grown in a developing country or is used as food aid, it will really provide more of those needed things in places where it's necessary." 
Same taste
In making the wheat more nutritious, the researchers did not change how it tastes, Dubcovsky says.
"We're not changing the composition or anything very dramatic in the grain," he says. 
"I don't think a simple step like this will solve hunger in the world. I'm not that naive. But I think it's heading in the right direction," Dubcovsky says. 
The gene made the grain mature more quickly while also boosting its protein and micronutrient content by 10-15% in the pasta and bread wheat varieties with which the researchers worked.
"What this gene does is it uses better what is in the plant already, so rather than leave the protein and the zinc and iron in the straw, we've moved a little bit more into the grain," Dubcovsky says. 
The wheat varieties bred by the scientists are not genetically modified, which could help them become accepted commercially, they say. 
"We didn't do it by genetic modification. The normal wheat crosses perfectly well with the wild wheat. So we just crossed it after normal breeding," Dubcovsky says.
The research team includes scientists from the US Department of Agriculture and the University of Haifa in Israel. 
Dubcovsky heads a consortium of 20 public wheat-breeding programs called the Wheat Coordinated Agricultural Project.
Annual wheat production is estimated at 620 million tonnes of grain worldwide.

The mass extinction known as the Great Dying 250 million years ago had profound and lasting effects on marine life. The upper part of the image represents life before the mass extinction, the lower part afterwards
About 95% of the Earth's marine species and 70% of its land species were wiped out during a mass extinction about 250 million years ago, according to Australian and US researchers.
This event, which occurred at the end of the Permian age and is known as the Great Dying, fundamentally changed which species survived in the world's oceans.
And scientists at James Cook University in Townsville, Queensland and the Field Museum in Chicago warn that modern human-induced changes to the ecosystem could have a similar impact. 
The researchers report in today's issue of the journal Science how they came across the culling of species while examining figures on the numbers of marine life forms in communities over the past 540 million years. 
Simple species that did not move or search for food were largely wiped out, they conclude.
More complex life forms such as crabs and snails that went looking for food took over. 
The biological devastation occurred when the Earth was believed to have had only one continent, surrounded by a single ocean.
The researchers did not go into what caused the mass extinction.
But using a new palaeobiology database, they gave what they say are the most exhaustive details ever assembled of its effect. 
'Ecologically simple' species such as stationary shells and other forms that filtered food out of the water were replaced by complex communities, mobile species such as crabs and clams.
"We think these are the first analyses of this type at this large scale," says Dr Peter Wagner, associate curator of fossil invertebrates at the Field Museum and lead author of the study, who worked with Dr Matthew Kosnik of James Cook University. 
"They show that the end-Permian mass extinction permanently altered not just taxonomic diversity but also the prevailing marine ecosystem structure," Wagner says.
The results of the study could provide a warning on how we treat the ecosystem now, the experts say.
"Studies by modern marine ecologists suggest that humans are reducing certain marine ecosystems to something reminiscent of 550 million years ago, prior to the explosion of animal diversity," Wagner says.
"The asteroid that wiped out the dinosaurs couldn't manage that."

A fraction of the amber collected so far from the beaches of northern Australia
Huge chunks of amber containing the remnants of ancient rainforests have been found along beaches in Far North Queensland, the first amber fossils to be found in Australia.
The amber pieces, some as big as a football, contain flies, beetles, spiders, flowers, fungi, moss, fern spores and pollen as well as bubbles of gas and water from the time, the researchers say.
The fossils are at least 4 million years old, they say, possibly much older.
Fisherman Dale Wicks and partner Beth Norris discovered the amber while taking evening walks along the beach on the Cape York Peninsula, says University of New South Wales palaeontologist Henk Godthelp.
"It turns out that it was the very first discovery of true amber in Australia," says Godthelp, who was invited to analyse the fossils and reported the find at the Riversleigh Society meeting in Sydney this week.
While amber-like substances such as copal and coal resin are found in Australia, no-one had found true amber, he says.
Godthelp, who studies the evolution of rainforests, says the fossilised resin is most likely from kauri pine, which grows in rainforests. 
He says amber is very good at preserving living creatures trapped inside it because it stops the air from getting to them and also contains chemicals that act as preservatives.
Anything trapped inside it, he says, will give a unique picture of ancient rainforests.
This includes insects, which come from the rainforest canopy, and bubbles of water or gas, which he says could provide clues about past climates.
Nearly one in five of the amber pieces found contain fossils or bubbles of water or gas, says Godthelp.
"By world standards, that's remarkably high."
How old?
Godthelp says he doesn't know how old the amber is yet but it would be at least 4 million years old, possibly much older.
"We think it's probably Tertiary," he says.

Polonium interferes with the body's ability to repair itself
Polonium-210, the highly toxic radioactive isotope found in the body of poisoned former Russian spy Alexander Litvinenko is a very rare, exotic material that is difficult to obtain, scientists say.
The UK's Health Protection Agency says Litvinenko, who died last week in a London hospital, had a significant amount of the radioactive isotope in his body.
But how it got there and where it came from is a mystery.
Radiation and chemistry experts say large-scale equipment, such as a nuclear reactor, would be needed to produce sufficient amounts to kill.
"It is not as simple as the idea that somebody might have broken into a radioactivity cabinet at some local hospital and walked off with some polonium," says Dr Andrea Sella, a lecturer in chemistry at University College London.
Although scientists would not speculate on the source of the polonium, Sella says Litvinenko's death is not a random killing.
"This is not a tool chosen by a group of amateurs. These people had some serious resources behind them," he says.
Polonium is a by-product of uranium that was discovered by Polish chemist Marie Curie in the late 19th century.
It's a rare but naturally occurring metalloid found in the soil and atmosphere, and even in the human body.
But at high doses it is highly toxic if ingested or inhaled; it emits alpha particles that can damage the body's tissues and organs.
"[Alpha particles] are unable to penetrate a sheet of paper and so it is not a hazard unless ingested," says Professor William Gelletly of the University of Surrey.
Long-term exposure to radiation can cause mutations and cancer. But exposure to a short, intense burst of radiation causes major damage to key control centres in cells.
"An alpha particle strikes a strand of DNA. It snips it in two, which is bad news, or glues two strands together. Either way normal cell repair mechanisms may be unable to sort that out," says Sella.
"The result is that essentially the cellular command and control network [in the body] falls apart. That is what radiation sickness is all about."
Professor David Ray, of the University of Nottingham, says even if a high dose of radiation could not be detected externally after Litvinenko was admitted to hospital a fatal dose could have concentrated in deep tissues such as bone marrow.
"The limited information that has been released about Mr Litvinenko's condition and the timing of his death is consistent with either radiation poisoning or chemicals that stop cell division," he says.
Polonium-210 also has a very short half-life of 138 days, at which point it loses half of its radioactivity.
"That is long enough so you can handle it and deliver it to your target and it will pack a punch," Sella says.
Polonium-210 is used in research and medicine, as well as a heating source for space components.
But in those forms it is not conducive to easy poisoning, scientists say.

Compounds isolated from mangoes could be used to treat metabolic disorders, early research suggests
A mango a day may one day protect against diabetes and high cholesterol, a preliminary study suggests.
The study is analysing how individual components of the luscious summer favourite affect human cells.
And early results, presented at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne this week, suggest that some mango components act on the same pathways that diabetes and cholesterol drugs target.
University of Queensland PhD student Ashley Wilkinson says the study, the first of its kind, aims to find unique ingredients in mangoes and other tropical fruit like paw paws.
"There's been a lot of research looking at nutritional bioactives but it's focused on more temperate fruit and vegetables like broccoli and grapes. And there hasn't been any research looking at tropical fruit in the context of looking at modulating cellular processes," she says.
Dr Sarah Roberts-Thomson of the university's school of pharmacy, who is supervising the work, says early results suggest some compounds in mangoes work by activating or inhibiting groups of receptors known as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors, or PPARs.
"We don't know yet how the whole thing's going to play out but we know some of the individual components activate these receptors or even inhibit them," she says.
"That could end up with positive nutritional health benefits for diabetes and high cholesterol."
PPARs are also increasingly being linked to colon and breast cancer, and the study will investigate whether compounds in mangoes can also kill cancerous cells. 
One of the compounds the researchers are focusing on is quercetin, a chemical also found in onions.
Another is norathyriol, a by-product of mangiferin, which is found in a range of fruits and traditional antidiabetic herbs.
Gut bacteria convert mangiferin into norathyriol, Wilkinson says. Once converted, it appears to have an even more potent affect on PPARs.
Preliminary findings also suggest that mango skin, often a component of mango juice, is particularly rich in these compounds, Roberts-Thomson says.
A long way down the track these compounds could be isolated to form alternative treatments for metabolic disorders like diabetes and high cholesterol, she says.
The study is being conducted with the Queensland Department of Primary Industries.

The real-life study found clubbers were using much higher doses of MDMA than lab studies could ever test
The idea of being followed around a nightclub by a researcher bent on taking a blood sample and measuring your temperature may not be your idea of a good time.
But 'field' studies like this may be the only way to get the full picture of the effects of the drug ecstasy, or MDMA, says University of Adelaide pharmacologist Professor Rod Irvine.
Irvine, whose unique recreation-setting study of ecstasy was presented at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne today, says real-life studies of ecstasy paint a very different picture to conventional, controlled, low-dose laboratory studies.
"I'm not saying that we must go out into clubs and do naturalistic studies and that they're the only things to do, but those sorts of studies must be included in the spectra of what we're doing," he says.
"People out there will use much higher doses of the drugs than would ever be allowed ethically in a controlled clinical setting.
"So it gives you the opportunity ... to perhaps pick up data that you could never replicate in a laboratory."
Taking the lab to the club
Irvine's study, conducted with the PhD student Kate Morefield, analysed 10 people who took ecstasy in a party setting.
The subjects, aged around 27, had taken one to five pills.
Blood samples were collected just before taking the ecstasy and once an hour for the next four hours. Heart rate, temperature and blood pressure was also regularly monitored.
The study showed that using the drug in a recreational setting produced higher elevations in heart rate, blood pressure and skin temperature than previous laboratory studies had shown.
The concentration of MDMA, or methylenedioxymethamphetamine, in clubbers' blood also exceeded those reported in clinical research, Irvine says.
"In recreational settings, individuals experience or tolerate physiological effects of greater magnitude and achieve considerably higher blood concentrations of MDMA ... than those reported in controlled clinical studies," the research, contained in a poster presentation, says.
For more information about ecstasy and other drugs, see the DrugInfo Clearing House website, run by the Australian Drug Foundation.

Humpback whales have surprisingly complex brains, which raises questions about how these cetaceans evolved
Humpback whales have a type of brain cell seen only in humans, the great apes, and other cetaceans such as dolphins, US researchers report.
This might mean such whales are more intelligent than they have been given credit for, the scientists say.
And it suggests the basis for complex brains either evolved more than once, or has gone unused by most animal species.
The finding may help explain some whale behaviours, such as intricate communication skills, the formation of alliances, cooperation, cultural transmission and the use of tools, the researchers report in journal The Anatomical Record. 
Professor Patrick Hof and colleagues from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York discovered a type of cell called a spindle neurone in the cortex of the whale brains.
They found the cells in areas comparable to where they are seen in humans and great apes.
Although the function of spindle neurones is not well understood, they may be involved in cognition - learning, remembering and recognising the world.
Spindle cells may be affected by Alzheimer's disease and other debilitating brain disorders such as autism and schizophrenia. 
Complex social patterns
The researches found spindle neurones in the same location in toothed whales with the largest brains, which the researchers say suggests the cells may be related to brain size.
Toothed whales such as orcas are generally considered more intelligent than baleen whales such as humpbacks and blue whales, which filter water for their food.
The humpbacks also have structures that resemble 'islands' in the cerebral cortex, also seen in some other mammals.
These islands may have evolved to promote fast and efficient communication between neurones, the researchers say. 
Spindle neurones probably first appeared in the common ancestor of hominids, humans and great apes about 15 million years ago, the researchers say. They are not seen in lesser apes or monkeys.
In cetaceans they would have evolved earlier, possibly as early as 30 million years ago, the researchers say. 
How did these cells evolve?
Either the spindle neurones were only kept in the animals with the largest brains or they evolved several times independently, the researchers say. 
"In spite of the relative scarcity of information on many cetacean species, it is important to note in this context that sperm whales, killer whales, and certainly humpback whales, exhibit complex social patterns that included intricate communication skills, coalition-formation, cooperation, cultural transmission and tool usage," the researchers write. 
"It is thus likely that some of these abilities are related to comparable histological complexity in brain organisation in cetaceans and in hominids."

The shapes and colours of this abalone shell are governed by genes that are expressed in precise locations beneath its shell
Scientists have found the genes responsible for the spectacular kaleidoscope of shapes, patterns and colours that are the hallmark of tropical abalone, edible marine snails found in Australia's Great Barrier Reef.
Researchers say the vibrant range of patterns and colours on their shell mirror the expression of specific genes in the mollusc's mantle, the umbrella of skin just below the shell.
The international research team publish its findings in the journal BMC Biology.
All snails have a mantle, which creates their shell. But marine snails don't build their shells from within.
"Instead they release molecules into the sea water and then pull together things like calcium and chalk from the water [to add to the molecules to create their shells]," says Australian co-author Professor Bernie Degnan, from the University of Queensland.
"So the beautiful shells you see are actually the product of taking things out of the sea water."
This combination of secreted molecules and molecules from the sea acts to strengthen the shell.
Mystery molecules
The research team was interested in finding out which molecules the marine snail releases through its mantle.
To do this, they sequenced 530 randomly-selected genes in the mantle tissue of the Haliotis asinina abalone.
They then collaborated with German colleagues from the University of G&ouml;ttingen to analyse how these genes are expressed.
The team identified 331 genes that encode proteins expressed in the mantle, a quarter of which are secreted. 
Each gene is expressed in a specific part of the mantle, with each area responsible for creating a specific shape, pattern or colour on the shell.
"What happens is that the mantle secretes proteins and somehow these proteins interact with the seawater to make the shell," Degnan says.
By comparing the abalone DNA sequences with the genome of a related mollusc, the team showed that the genes encoding the secreted mantle proteins are likely to be rapidly evolving.

Australia's free trade deal with the US may mean nanotherapies may be rushed through tests for safety, efficacy and quality, one critic says. But not everyone agrees
Australia may be forced to rush through inadequately tested and unsafe medical nanotherapies because of its free trade agreement with the US, a health technology regulation expert says.
Dr Thomas Faunce, a senior lecturer at the Australian National University college of law and medical school, says Australia is obliged under the free trade agreement (FTA) to make innovative pharmaceutical products more readily available.
Drugs and medical devices using nanotechnology could fall under this banner, he says.
Faunce, who presented his concerns at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne today, says as a result of the FTA, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) may come under pressure to rush trials of new nanotherapies, particulary during preliminary safety, efficacy and quality testing.
"The main concern is that the FTA puts obligations on the TGA to initiate a discussion [with US authorities] about fast tracking innovative medical products," he says.
"It's not quite sure exactly what that means but the concern is that we're still in a situation where it hasn't been definitively established that nanotechnology is safe."
Nanotechnology involves using extremely small particles on the scale of one billionth of a metre.
In medicine, it could be used to create tiny 'machines' that are introduced into our bodies to deliver medicine, diagnose disease or even fight cancer cell by cell.
But because the technology is so new there are concerns about its safety, Faunce says. 
This is because the minute size of the particles means they could evade our normal respiratory and immune defences to enter the lungs or even penetrate our skin.
There are fears that once in our bodies, nanoparticles could enter our circulatory and nervous systems, potentially becoming lodged in organs including the lungs and brain.
"Major concern with this unprecedented research and development is that engineered nanoparticles may present unique health risks when used in medical applications," Faunce says.
"They are highly reactive and mobile within the human body and there are currently no effective methods to monitor exposure risks."
Is this a problem?
Monash University's Professor Brian Priestly, director of the Australian Centre for Human Health Risk Assessment, says it's probably true that developments in nanotechnology are happening too fast for the regulators to keep up with them.
"But that's not to say that it's being ignored," says Priestly, who has worked with the TGA in the past.
"I know that the TGA looks very carefully at all sorts of innovative technologies so they'll certainly be looking at any developments in anotechnology."
A TGA spokesperson says rigorous testing is required for all new drug products and nanotherapies are no exception.
"Extensive, non-clinical, toxicological and clinical safety testing is required for all new drug products," the spokesperson says.
"No concessions or reductions in these requirements will apply to nanomaterials in therapeutic products."
The federal government is currently considering the need for a distinct nanotechnology regulatory body and is expected to release a national nanotechnology strategy in coming months.

Honey bees stick out their proboscis when they smell explosives. So could they do sniffer dogs out of a job?
Bees have been trained to sniff out explosives in a project scientists say could have far-reaching applications for security and the Iraq war.
Scientists at a US weapons laboratory say they trained honey bees to stick out their proboscis, the tube they use to feed on nectar, when they smell explosives in anything from cars and roadside bombs to belts similar to those used by suicide bombers.
Researchers at the Los Alamos National Laboratory have dubbed their research the Stealthy Insect Sensor Project. 
They trained bees to recognise substances by exposing them to the odour of explosives followed by a sugar water reward.
Among the substances they can sniff are dynamite and C-4 plastic explosives to the Howitzer propellant grains used in improvised explosive devices in Iraq. 
"When bees detect the presence of explosives, they simply stick their proboscis out," says research scientist Tim Haarmann.
"You don't have to be an expert in animal behaviour to understand it as there is no ambiguity."
The findings followed 18 months of research at the Los Alamos facility, the nation's leading nuclear weapons laboratory.
"We are very excited at the success of our research as it could have far-reaching implications for both defence and homeland security," Haarmann says. 
While scientists have trained wasps to respond to the trace of explosives, Haarmann says research with bees appeared to show more promise. 
Haarmann says the bees could be carried in hand-held detectors the size of a shoe box, and could be used to sniff out explosives in airports, roadside security checks, or even placed in robot bomb disposal equipment. 
He says the next step would be to manufacture the bee boxes and train security guards in their use. 
"It would be great to start saving some lives with this," he says.

This binary system regularly emits the most energetic gamma rays ever observed. The system consists of a huge star and a compact object, possibly a black hole
Astronomers have discovered an 'orbital clock' in the Milky Way, a gamma ray source 100,000 times more energetic than any other.
The repeated emission comes from a binary system where a compact object, possibly a small black hole, orbits a massive star about every 4 days.  
An international team of scientists reports its findings in the Journal of Astronomy and Astrophysics. 
Very High Energy (VHE) gamma rays in this system are produced when particles are accelerated to move at close to the speed of light.
This happens when particles from the strong stellar wind collide with particles from the compact object.
But the process is reversed when the gamma rays meet the intense ultraviolet light radiated by the star, and are absorbed. 
It is the production, then absorption, of the gamma rays that is responsible for complex variations in the signal.
The signal is strongest when the compact object is in front of the star and weakest when it is behind it.  
"This is the first time we've been able to identify this orbital variation in a high energy gamma ray source and it allows us to probe to much greater depth the astrophysics of gamma ray production and absorption," says Australian co-author Dr Gavin Rowell from the University of Adelaide. 
Neither the production nor the absorption processes are well understood. VHE gamma ray emission is rare and the object is one of just 30 such sources discovered in the past few years.
It is also the only one where the intensity of the emission changes in a regular fashion.
Rowell says a number of factors are involved in the signal's periodic patterns.
These include geometric effects relating to the orientation of the compact object to the star and the angle at which the system is seen from Earth.
"There is lots of interaction between events which leads to the flux profile we see.  The rules are quite simple but separating the influences of changes in the magnetic field, the intensity of the stellar wind and mechanisms contributing to particle acceleration and absorption is difficult," Rowell says.
"Orbital signatures like this are useful keys. They act as a probe of the changing environment as the compact object moves along its orbit and give a useful insight into how gamma rays are produced and what happens to them."
The source was detected as part of a survey of VHE gamma ray sources in the southern sky using the most sensitive ground based gamma ray detector, the High Energy Spectroscopic System in Namibia, southwest Africa.

The Antikythera Mechanism was so advanced in its mathematics and technology that the history of Ancient Greece may have to be rewritten
A 2100 year old clockwork machine whose remains were retrieved from a shipwreck more than a century ago has turned out to be the celestial supercomputer of the ancient world.
Scientists used 21st century technology to peer beneath the surface of the encrusted gearwheels of the so-called Antikythera Mechanism, made by the Ancient Greeks.
The researchers were stunned to find it could predict the ballet of the Sun and Moon over decades and calculate a lunar anomaly that would bedevil Isaac Newton himself. 
And nothing as complex was built for at least a thousand years, say the researchers, who publish their results today in the journal Nature.
"It's beautifully designed. Your jaw drops when you work out what they did and what they put into this," says astronomer Professor Mike Edmunds of Cardiff University.
"It implies the Greeks had great technical sophistication."
The Antikythera Mechanism was built in Greece around 150-100 BC and may be linked to the astronomer and mathematician Hipparchos.
But the machine did not surface until 1901 when Greek divers, who were exploring a Roman shipwreck, found 82 curious bronze fragments.
At first, these pieces, thickly encrusted and jammed together after lying more two millennia on the sea floor, lay forgotten.
But a closer look showed them to be exquisitely made, hand-cut, toothed gearwheels. 
The 29 gearwheels fitted together, possibly making some sort of astronomical calendar. But of what, exactly? 
The mystery unfolds
For a quarter of a century, the textbook on the strange find was a work written by a historian of science and technology, Professor Derek de Solla Price of Yale University.
He hypothesised that the machine in fact had 31 gearwheels, and did something pretty astonishing. 
It linked the solar year with a 19-year cycle in the phases of the Moon. This is the so-called Metonic cycle, which takes the Moon 235 lunar months to the same phase on the same date in the year.
Edmunds' team, gathering experts from the UK, Greece and the US, has now taken the tale several chapters forward.
21st century techniques
They used 3D x-ray computation tomography and high-resolution surface imaging to peek beneath the machine's surface, yet without damaging the priceless artefact.
There, they read inscriptions on the bronze cogs that had been unseen by human eyes since that Roman ship came to grief aeons before. 
The original device, they believe, is likely to have had 37 gearwheels and two clock-like faces, one front and one back.
It would have fitted into a slim wooden box measuring 31.5 x 19 centimetres, which was 10 centimetres thick. 
The machine was a 365-day calendar, which ingeniously factored in the leap year every four years. 
It not only provided the Metonic cycle, which was known to the Babylonians, it also gave the so-called Callippic cycle, which is four Metonic cycles minus one day and reconciles the solar year with the lunar calendar. 
It could also predict lunar and solar eclipses under the Saros cycle, a 223-month repetitive interplay of the Sun, Earth and Moon.
This function, presumably, would been useful for religious purposes, given that eclipses are traditionally taken as omens. 
The machine was also a star almanac, showing the times when the major stars and constellations of the Greek zodiac would rise or set and, speculatively, may also have shown the positions of the planets. 
Lunar anomaly
But even more impressive is a tiny pin-and-slot device that factors in a movement of the Moon that, for centuries, puzzled sky-watchers. 
In this so-called main lunar anomaly, the Moon appears to move across the heavens at different speeds at different times, the reason being its elliptical orbit around Earth.
"Newton used to say he would think about this until his head hurt," says Edmunds. 
This latter discovery prompts the scientists to wonder if the great Hipparchos, who drew up the first catalogue of the stars and wrote about the lunar anomaly in the 2nd century BC, may have had a hand in designing the mechanism. 
Adding circumstantial evidence to this theory is that the shipwreck was found to have jars and coins from Rhodes, where Hipparchos lived. 
The computer is so advanced in its mathematics and technology that the history of Ancient Greece may have to be rewritten, says Edmunds. 
"We now must ask: What else could they do? That's a difficult thing, because this is really the only surviving metallic artefact of its kind. Who knows what else may be lost?" 
Islamic science
It was not until the end of the first millennium AD and the golden age of Islamic science that anything so technologically wondrous surfaced again, if the archaeological evidence is a guide. 
This was an eight-geared astrolabe, depicting the movements of the Sun and Earth, by the Islamic astronomer al-Biruni in 996 AD. 
Had the Greeks' knowledge somehow survived and been transmitted across the centuries, to inspire al-Biruni?
Or had it withered away and disappeared, leaving Islamic scholars with the task of rediscovering what had been known 1000 years before?

Some scientists believe that the diversity of early Australians is explained by there being more than one founding population. But not everyone agrees
New genetic evidence suggests Australia may have been populated by two separate groups of humans, one arriving via Papua New Guinea, the other via Indonesia, a researcher says. 
But more work is needed to confirm the idea. And not all scientists agree that these latest results shed new light on the long-standing debate on how humans colonised Australia.
Dr Sheila van Holst Pellekaan, a molecular anthropologist from the University of New South Wales in Sydney, will present her research at a Australian Archaeological Association conference in Melbourne next month.
Previous genetic analysis shows that modern humans took two migration routes out of Africa 100,000 to 150,000 years ago, she says.
One group went north into Europe and Northern Eurasia, the other along the coast via Saudi Arabia, India and Southeast Asia.
Van Holst Pellekaan analysed mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from Aboriginal people in western New South Wales and Central Australia.
She says she found evidence of two ancient genetic groups that appear to be linked to these two migration routes.
Van Holst Pellekaan says some archaeologists argue there was more than one founding population of Australia and her research is the first genetic evidence that could be used to support this. 
It's possible that some Australians came in from the north via Papua New Guinea and the other took a more southerly route via Indonesia, she says.
Different views
Archaeologist Dr Colin Pardoe, who is speaking at the conference on a related topic, disagrees.
He believes the diversity of early Australians could have arisen from one group that came in from Southeast Asia and then diversified as it adapted to different environments.
Pardoe is not convinced van Holst Pellekaan has identified two founding groups.
"Are these two totally distinct groups that came in or are they representatives of one major group that came in that has all that diversity within it?" he asks.
This is a possibility that van Holst Pellekaan accepts.
"The idea of two founding populations is speculative," she says. "I can't prove it either way." 
Pardoe says more DNA samples from other places such as the Indonesian islands and Papua New Guinea would need to be analysed.
"We need to understand the pattern of variation in these large groupings to see where Australians are coming from," he says.
Professor Peter Brown of the University of New England in Armidale also says further data is required, including studies of Y chromosome DNA, as mtDNA only reflects the maternal line.
Van Holst Pellekaan says some Y-chromosome studies of Aboriginal people from Central Australia have found a connection with India, but there have been no comprehensive studies of this type.
Genetics reflects long Aboriginal history
Van Holst Pellekaan says despite the links with the global lineages that came out of Africa, the Australian groups are quite different from those shown in samples from Papua New Guinea, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Malaysia.
"[People] have to have been in Australia for a very long time for that diversity to generate. We're saying at least 40,000 years," she says.
Van Holst Pellekaan accepts the idea of tracing Aboriginal people back to Africa can clash with some cultural beliefs, which she respects.
"I simply present it to them as a scientist's way of seeing how the language groups might have related to each other," she says.
"I can only give them the information I come up with. I don't ask them to believe it."

Spider monkeys chew fragrant plants and 'anoint' themselves with the smelly mash. But no-one is sure why
What may be the most natural cologne in the world was recently discovered in a Mexican forest. The ingredients? Monkey spit and chewed up leaves.
According to a paper in the journal Primates, male Mexican spider monkeys chew the leaves of three aromatic plants: the Alamos pea tree, which has fragrant leaves and flowers, a flowering trumpet tree, and wild celery. 
Matthias Laska, a professor of zoology at Link&ouml;ping University in Sweden calls the ritual, which typically takes anywhere from 30 seconds to 2 minutes, monkey "self-anointing".
Laska and his colleagues observed the behaviour 20 times in two male spider monkeys that were part of a free-ranging group at the Parque de Flora y Fauna Silvestre Tropical in Veracruz, Mexico. 
The researchers determined the monkeys always applied just one plant species at a time. The application was routine, not unlike a man who regularly squirts on deodorant or cologne.
"In the majority of cases, the arm that did not hold the scent-bearing material was held high or grabbed a branch above the animal," Laska and his team write.
While this is the first reported case of such behaviour in wild Mexican spider monkeys, similar routines have been spotted among both male and female capuchin monkeys, owl monkeys, other spider monkeys and lemurs. 
In most of these cases, the scientists speculate that the leaf mash might have been used to mitigate topical skin infections or repel bugs.
But Laska and his team found that of the plants used by the Mexican spider monkeys, only wild celery is known to have insect-repelling compounds and antifungal properties. The other plants simply smell good.
The scientists, therefore, conclude that self-anointing "may play a role in the context of social communication, possibly for signalling of social status or to increase sexual attractiveness". 
In other words, monkeys could do it for the same basic reasons people use cologne.
Chemistry still a mystery
While the chemistry behind this remains a mystery, the odours may mimic those of fragrant, naturally occurring primate steroids, which are presumed to act as sex-stimulating pheromones.
Laska conducted an earlier study that found spider monkeys are particularly gifted at sniffing out such scents.
But not all monkeys want to smell like flowers and celery.
Dr Mary Baker, assistant professor of anthropology at Rhode Island College, has observed capuchin monkeys applying citrus and tobacco leaf mashes to their bodies.
Dr Christina Campbell, a scientist at the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at the University of California at Los Angeles, observed the same behaviour in black-handed spider monkeys in Panama.
"In general, I agree with the [new] findings," says Campbell. But she hasn't yet ruled out other possible reasons for scent rubbing.
"I think the behaviour may be some kind of signalling, although I am not convinced," she says.
"I also wonder whether it may function to stimulate or clean the gland that they rub the plant mixture on."
Laska hopes future studies will resolve such questions about the fragrant ritual.

Children may have permanent brain damage after chemotherapy, experts say 
Chemotherapy damages brain cells, according to two studies published this week, leading to memory loss and confusion in cancer patients, and possibly permanent damage in young children.
Cancer patients have long complained of 'chemobrain', a nickname for loss of memory and inability to solve problems and in general think clearly often seen after chemotherapy.
While the effects may wane in adults after a few years, one expert points out that the effects may be more permanent in children with growing brains.
Dr Masatoshi Inagaki of the Breast Cancer Survivors' Brain MRI Database Group in Japan and colleagues tested more than 200 breast cancer patients, some who had chemotherapy along with surgery and some who did not.
They used magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, to take detailed pictures of the patients' brains one and three years after treatment. 
A year after 51 patients had chemotherapy, the researchers found significant regions of the brain were smaller, notably those important to cognition. 
Cognition includes learning, some types of memory and the ability to understand the surrounding world clearly. 
But in 73 patients screened three years after chemotherapy, there were no such differences, Inagaki's team reports in the journal Cancer.
"Results lead to the idea that adjuvant chemotherapy could have a temporary effect on brain structure," the researchers write. 
"These findings can provide new insights for future research to improve the quality of life of cancer patients," they add.
Deadly damage
A second study shows that drugs used to treat cancer may damage normal, healthy brain cells more than the cancer cells they are meant to target. 
Dr Joerg Dietrich and colleagues at the University of Rochester in New York worked with human brain cells in lab dishes.
They exposed them to common chemotherapy drugs such as cisplatin, carmustine and cytarabine. They also soaked cells from real human tumours in the drugs. 
The drugs killed more brain cells than tumour cells, they report in the Journal of Biology.
Low doses of the chemotherapy drugs killed 60-90% of brain cells called oligodendrocyte precursor cells and neurone precursor cells, but had little effect on most of the cancer cells.
To kill 80% of cancer cells, doses that killed 70-100% of the brain cells were required.
When they treated live mice with the drugs, Dietrich's team found that brain cells in the mice continued to die for at least six weeks after the end of treatment.
Straight to the head
Dr Patricia Duffner, a neurologist at the University of Buffalo School of Medicine in New York, says radiation therapy on the head has long been known to affect intelligence. 
"Cranial irradiation can be so devastating to the brains of young children [under three to five years] that, by the mid-1980s, many families opted not to treat babies and very young children who had malignant brain tumours," she writes in a commentary in the same journal.
"Very high-dose chemotherapy, requiring bone marrow transplantation or peripheral stem cell support, is now standard therapy for children with certain brain tumours, especially for the very young," she adds.
"There are no easy answers. We must balance the need for survival with quality of life."

The Ngarrindjeri people put the repatriated remains of their ancestors to rest. Image used with permission from the Aboriginal community
Aboriginal human remains stolen in the name of science are being reburied in traditional burial mounds using the latest technology to ensure that existing burials are not disturbed.
The reburial project, involving the Ngarrindjeri people of South Australia, will be discussed at the Australian Archaeological Association Conference in Melbourne next week.
Members of a thriving medical research community took Ngarrindjeri human remains during the 19th century and as late as the 1950s, says Flinders University archaeologist Dr Lynley Wallis, who is helping with the project.
She says literally thousands, if not tens of thousands, of bodies were removed.
"People were stealing bodies from graves around Adelaide," she says, adding that many traditional burial mounds were in sand dunes, which made it particularly easy for bodies to be taken.
"Sometimes it was within days or weeks [of burial]," she says. "Worse than that, they were being taken out of the morgue in Adelaide."
Remains were sent to places such as the British Museum and the Museum of Edinburgh in the UK, as well as the South Australian Museum and Museum Victoria in Australia, says Willis.
In 2003, the Museum of Edinburgh became the first to repatriate the remains of more than 300 Ngarrinjeri people.
Remains were not always complete sets of bones, she says.
"Sometimes it might be an organ in a jar. Sometimes it's a skull, sometimes it's a leg bone."
Some remains were up to 2200 years old, she says, and many of them had never been examined.
Voices of the Aboriginal community
Wallis is keen to emphasise she cannot speak on behalf of the Ngarrindjeri community, representatives of which were not immediately contactable.
But in an interview last year with a Flinders University researcher, chair of the Ngarrindjeri Heritage Committee, Uncle Tom Trevorrow, explained the need for reburial ceremonies for the repatriated remains of Old People, the term of respect used when referring to ancestors.
"We're forced to do a repeat of a funeral ceremony because other people have gone in and taken our Old People's bodies without listening to us or getting our permission," he said.
"We don't know what those Old People have been through, we don't know what they've done to them."
The customary burial ceremony involves smoking bodies to allow their spirits to travel and to be at rest.
Once disturbed from their resting places, this ceremony needed to be carried out again, Uncle Tom said.
Role of the archaeologists
Using the limited paperwork accompanying the remains, the Ngarrindjeri community has been identifying which burial mounds they were taken from.
"If they come from the river that's their country ... if they come from the lake that's their group," said Uncle Tom.
The first reburial took place at Hack's Point on 23 September this year.
To make sure they didn't disturb people and cultural objects already buried in the mounds, the community called on Wallis and others to help.
"The last thing they wanted to do was to disturb existing burials," says Wallis.
The team used various geophysical techniques to work out which areas in the burial mound they could dig up safely.
This is the first time such technology has been used for Indigenous reburials in Australia, says Wallis.
The researchers used a magnetometer to detect the mineral maghaemite, which could have formed from fires used during ceremonies.
The team also used electromagnetic induction that detects changes in moisture and conductivity of sediments that occur when ground is disturbed.
By combining the results of the two surveys the team identified a location in the burial mound where there had been no disturbance.
The remains of 23 people repatriated from the Museum of Edinburghwere reburied in the first ceremony.
"Thankfully our science worked and we didn't hit any existing burials," says Wallis.
Signs from the ancestors?
Wallis says the day before the first reburial a storm blew up over nearby Kangaroo Island, which Ngarrindjeri people call the "island of the dead", where spirits go after people have been buried.
They thought this was the old people stirring because they knew something was about to happen, says Wallis.
On the day itself, a large flock of pelicans flew over the burial ceremony, says Wallis who was present at the reburial.
Pelicans, known as ngori, are a totem for the Ngarrindjeri people and the flock were seen as the spirits of the old people coming to see the burial, says Wallis.
"It was so amazing, these huge flocks flying in formation. If you didn't believe in Indigenous connection to country, after going through that process you certainly would have."

Nanoparticles are already used in consumer products including toiletries
Fears about nanotechnology may be overblown, says an Australian expert in toxicology and environmental health.
Monash University's Professor Brian Priestly, director of the Australian Centre for Human Health Risk Assessment, says we need to put fears about the potential health risks of nanoparticles into perspective.
Priestly was among a number of nanotech specialists who spoke about nanotoxicology at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne this week.
"I'm not saying that we don't have knowledge gaps that we have to fill," he says. "But some of the statements that are being made I think are extreme."
The federal government is expected to release a national strategy on nanotechnology in the coming months and is considering whether an independent regulator should be established to oversee this rapidly advancing field.
Priestly says it's unlikely that members of the general public will be exposed to nanoparticles.
"What we have to ask is what are the chances that we will be exposed to these very fine manufactured nanoparticles, because risk is really a function of toxicity and exposure," he says.
"These things may have slightly higher grades of toxicity than larger particles but a lot depends upon whether we're exposed to them and how we're exposed to them.
"If they get into the air and we inhale them, yeah, they're likely to present the same sorts of risks we have with other types of air pollution of very fine particles."
He also says the majority of nanoparticles will be safe because they're fixed in surface coatings.
Dr Kelly B�ruB�, a lecturer in cell biology at Cardiff University in Wales, has been studying nanosized products of combustion like soot and coal ash as a model for engineered nanoparticles.
She says human have been exposed to these particles for as long as we have been burning things, and it's known they can cause inflammatory responses and cardiac problems.
She says these are the sorts of particles we should be worried about, rather than engineered nanoparticles.
"These are the ones that everybody's exposed to every day. It's highly unlikely that the average person like you or I is going to be exposed to any of these engineered ones," she says.
Uses of nanoparticles
Nanotechnoloy involves the manipulation of atoms and molecules for uses in medicine, research, computing and the creation of new types of materials and surfaces.
Nanoparticles are already used in a wide range of commercially available products including sun screens, cosmetics, shoe polish, crayons and even tennis racquets. 
The federal government says it has been assessing therapeutic products containing nanotechnology components for many years.
"Fumed silicon dioxide nanoparticle aggregates for example, have been use in food, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals for about half a century and carbon black nanoparticles have been used in rubber products for more than a century," a health department spokesperson says.
Sunblock creams using zinc oxide and titanium dioxide nanoparticles are also being manufactured in Australia.
Red flags
But Dr Paul Wright, associate professor in immunotoxicology at RMIT University and director of the research network Nanosafe Australia, says rapid recent developments highlight the need for caution.
He says engineered nanoparticles have unique and properties compared to the sort of particles B�ruB� has been looking at.
"These are derivitised, these are functionalised nanoparticles, they can have totally unknown effects on the biological system," he says.
Dr Sam Bruschi is a consultant in medicinal chemistry, who recently finished a review of nanotech safety issues for the Australian Safety and Compensation Council.
He says the little that we do know about the health impact of nanotechnology has raised some red flags.
He says animal studies have found pre-cancerous lesions like fibrosis and granulomas in mice that have had carbon nanotubes aspirated into their lungs. 
Tumours associated with titanium nanoparticles, which are used in sunscreen, have been found in research animals, he says. And in the lab, "quantum dots kill cells quite happily".
"There are some smoking guns out there and all we have to do is find the bullets," he says.
Because of their size, nanoparticles can evade the body's normal respiratory and immune defences and once inhaled or absorbed through the skin, potentially finding their way into the nervous and circulatory systems and becoming deposited in organs including the brain.
Much of the concern has also focused on carbon nanotubes, because of fears they are the right size and shape to act like deadly asbestos fibres.
Jury's out
B�ruB� says until we have microscopes powerful to actually track where nanoparticles are going in the environment and in our bodies, and what they actually do there, the jury must remain out about any pending health catastrophe.
"We don't have the technology there to see exactly what these particles are doing, so we can't tell you exactly what the health impacts will be," she says.
"Unregulated use [of nanoparticles] could open society up to the asbestos of the 20th century.
"But we've been living with [combustion-derived nanoparticles since caveman times and we've learned to adapt to it."

We may soon be getting weather reports from Mars without sending probes into space. And scientists say an old way of gathering data may do the trick
Astronomers have shown that an old technique for mapping the topography of Mars from Earth could be used in a novel way to map the Red Planet's weather. 
The thin atmosphere on Mars consists almost entirely of carbon dioxide.
And before spacecraft images revealed the planet's surface features, astronomers tried to use variations in the density of carbon dioxide to map the topography, with mixed results.
Now preliminary ground-based images of Mars taken in the near infrared region of the spectrum, which is most sensitive to carbon dioxide, have revealed interesting surface features.
These show remarkable agreement with the accurate topographical data obtained from the Mars Orbiting Laser Altimeter aboard the Mars Global Surveyor. 
The density of carbon dioxide also indicates the atmospheric pressure at the surface, which is subject to huge seasonal variation as carbon dioxide readily transports from one pole to another.
So PhD candidate Sarah Chamberlain from the Australian Centre for Astrobiology at Macquarie University says the technique could be now be used for remotely sensing changes in atmospheric pressure in the Red Planet's dynamic weather system.  
"Since we now have an accurate topographic map of the Martian surface, we can use the technique to look for variations from the topography to indicate regions of high and low pressure," she says.  
This will provide a pressure map that will help with understanding weather patterns through seasonal changes across the planet.  
"Weather is important to understand on Mars for landing spacecraft and looking at the atmospheric dynamics on other planets," says Chamberlain. 
Measurements of the surface pressure distribution on Mars provide the key data needed for testing general circulation models of the Martian atmosphere.
The only pressure measurements that have been made so far are from the Viking landers in 1976 and later the Pathfinder Rover, which cannot give a global picture of the Martian atmosphere.
Chamberlain is co-author of a paper in the latest Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia, which suggests that until a network of surface stations can be established on Mars, remote-sensing techniques such as the one demonstrated will provide the only way of obtaining such data.

Criminal psychopaths might not stop their attacks because they may have learned to dampen their brain's response to other peoples' distress signals
A biological defect in the way blood flows in the brain rather than a psychological defect could be one reason why some people become criminal psychopaths, a new study shows. 
Researchers from the Institute of Psychiatry at King's College London monitored the emotional responses of six men who had committed repeat offences such as attempted murder, rape with strangulation and grievous bodily harm. 
All six subjects scored highly on the Hare Psychopathy Checklist, a test that looks for the presence of cunning, manipulative or exploitative behaviours as well as lack of guilt or remorse.
It is thought that people with psychopathic disorders lack empathy because they cannot process when someone is distressed, for instance a face that looks scared.
To test this, the people in the study were shown images of fearful, happy and neutral faces.
Their brains were then imaged with functional MRI, a type of brain scan that shows which parts of the brain 'light up' in response to these images.
Their brain scans were then compared to those of healthy control subjects. 
"We've never been able to look directly in the brain before and what we found is that when psychopaths were exposed to frightened faces the distress cue didn't increase the psychopath's blood flow. It decreased it," says author Professor Declan Murphy.
He adds psychopaths might not stop their attacks because they may have learned to dampen their brain's response to other peoples' distress signals. 
Tom Fahy, professor of forensic mental health and co-author of the study, which is published in the latest issue of the British Journal of Psychiatry, says criminal psychopathy may be inherited or acquired through very deprived and abusive childhoods.
He adds the findings of the study open possibilities for new treatments other than counselling therapies and could be used to identify people who had a higher risk of re-offending. 
"Psychopaths currently respond pretty poorly to treatment but this biological problem could be used as a marker for people who say they have recovered but actually haven't," Murphy says.

The future is nuclear, says a new report into Australia's rich uranium resources
New nuclear technology will cut waste so significantly that we may no longer need to dump it underground, according to an Australian government report.
The report, tabled in parliament this week, also says Australia should lift restrictions on uranium exploration, mining and export because at present nuclear power is the only "reliable and proven" way of cutting greenhouse gas emissions.
"Advanced nuclear reactors and spent fuel reprocessing technologies are now being developed which will significantly reduce the quantity and toxicity of nuclear waste," says the report, Australia's uranium - greenhouse friendly fuel for an energy hungry world.
"These technological advances could potentially obviate the need for geological repositories altogether."
The new generation of reactors could also reduce the isolation period needed for waste to "just a few hundred years".
But Dr Mark Diesendorf of the Institute of Environmental Studies at the University of New South Wales, has dismissed these comments as "propaganda for the nuclear industry".
He says the 440 nuclear reactors operating around the world today are "almost identical" to those of 25 years ago.
"This is speculation about future reactors that are not on the market," he says of comments made in the report.
Reducing waste
Nuclear waste consists of spent uranium, plutonium and other by-products, which critics like Diesendorf say needs to be managed for up to hundreds of thousands of years.
Professor Stephen Lincoln, an expert in nuclear energy and uranium from the University of Adelaide, says it's possible to recycle some of this waste by turning it into a mixed uranium-plutonium oxide, or MOX.
"So instead of just using uranium oxide in the fuel rods you use mixed uranium and plutonium. That burns up the plutonium but it also produces nuclear power," he says.
Professor Leslie Kemeny, Australian foundation member of the International Nuclear Energy Academy and a consultant nuclear physicist, says three reactors around the world are already using this so-called MOX.
Kemeny says we'll also get better at developing ways of using waste from nuclear reactors, not only as an energy source but for use in industry and hospitals.
"I firmly believe ... everything that is taken out of the reactor core to be put into a waste depository is highly valuable," he says.
Improving safety
Kemeny says new technology will not only cut back waste, but will make nuclear reactors safer.
He says pebble-bed reactors are being developed that package the uranium in graphite balls rather than iron rods, making waste easier to handle.
"With the generation IV reactors you will go for a fuel element that is enriched particles of uranium interspersed with silicon and carbon in a small ball or hexagonal shaped fuel element," he says.
"You can circulate these balls in and out of the reactor or just drop in a set of orange-sized or tennis ball-sized and take out ones that have been there a long time."
And because pebble-bed reactors are cooled by gas like helium or carbon dioxide they reduce the risk of overheating and a Chernobyl-style meltdown, he says.
But Deisendorf says according to his calculations pebble-bed reactors would produce 13 times more nuclear waste than conventional ones.
"You don't have rods but you have 13 times the quantity of nuclear waste because you're embedding the fuel in pebbles, and the pebbles occupy a lot of volume and it all becomes highly radioactive," he says.
Lincoln says while pebble bed rectors are "fine in principle", none are currently being used to generate power and the fuel is more expensive to produce.
"When you bring in any new technology it's got to be proved and tested and the final analysis is, is it commercially competitive in terms of producing electricity by comparison with the currently used reactors?" he says.
Lincoln says no degree of technological sophistication will ensure 100% safety at nuclear reactors and adds it's difficult to imagine a reactor so advanced that it produces no waste at all. 
"It's true that modern reactors are better in that respect, they produce less waste. But they're always going to produce it," he says.
"It's still quite a significant issue because at this point in time there is not one single permanent storage for high-level nuclear waste."

Reef sharks in Australia's Great Barrier Reef are being fished to the brink of extinction, a new report suggests
Southeast Asia's voracious appetite for shark fin soup may be contributing to a dramatic drop in the number of reef sharks in Australia's Great Barrier Reef, a marine scientist says.
Dr Sean Connolly and colleagues from James Cook University found a 10-fold decrease in shark numbers in areas where fishing is allowed after conducting the first shark census in the World Heritage listed area.
The study, published in the latest issue of the journal Current Biology,  looked at two species of shark, the grey reef shark (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos) and the whitetip reef shark (Triaenodon obesus).
The sharks were observed across four fishing management zones, ranging from strict no-entry to open fishing.
"We found [where fishing is strictly banned] shark numbers are 10 times higher than in zones where there is fishing," Connolly says.
"We can see that the populations are severely depleted already but we also have projections that say that those declines are ongoing and quite rapid." 
The study sent out divers to count shark numbers as well as using mathematical modelling taking into account births, deaths and population growth patterns.
It found whitetip reef sharks are declining at an average rate of 7% a year with a 17% rate of decline for grey reef sharks. 
The study predicts that if the trend continues populations will drop to 5% and 0.1% of what they would be without fishing.
Shark fin soup
Conolly says the results show that fishing is threatening reef sharks with ecological extinction, where their numbers will be so small they will no longer play a role in the marine ecosystem.
Some overfishing could be driven by the international market for shark fins, he says.
People fishing in certain areas of the reef are able to catch sharks and sell their fins separately, although they must bring back the carcass.
"There probably is some selling of shark fin to the international market and that pressure is likely to increase as the price for fins goes up, because there will be growing demand and an increasingly depleted shark populations," Connolly says.
Sharks are also often viewed as a pest by anglers looking for other game, such as coral trout, he says. Or they could be caught by accident.
"One of the main causes of decline in sharks is because they are what's called a bycatch species, which means you catch them by mistake when you're trying to get something else," he says.
Total landings of all shark species on the Great Barrier Reef have increased about four fold in the past 10 years, Connolly says.
Impact on the reef
Sharks sit at the top of the reef food chain but Connolly says it's hard to predict exactly how their loss would affect the coral reef ecosystem.
"Some modelling suggests that removing sharks can erode the resilience of coral reefs because if you take sharks out the smaller predators in the system could increase in number, and that could potentially decrease number of grazing seaweed eating fish," he says.
The study concludes that "immediate and substantial" reductions in shark fishing are needed for reef populations to recover.

A base on the Moon would be used to test technologies needed for future trips to Mars
The US space agency says it plans to build a permanently occupied base on the Moon, most likely at its south pole. 
The base will serve as a science outpost as well as a testbed for technologies needed for future travel to Mars, NASA says.
Construction will follow a series of flights to the Moon scheduled to begin by 2020.
"We're going for a base on the Moon," says Dr Scott Doc Horowitz, NASA's associate administrator for exploration from the Johnson Space Center in Houston.
Plans for what the base will look like and what astronauts would do there have yet to be determined.
Similarly, NASA has not projected a date when the base would go into operation. 
The Moon's polar sites are preferred to equatorial regions because of more moderate temperatures and longer periods of sunlight, which is critical for the solar-powered electrical systems NASA plans to develop.
Eventually, nuclear power may be used to augment or replace the solar energy systems. 
Scientists also suspect the poles have resources such as hydrogen, ice and other materials that could be used to support life. 
"It's exciting," says NASA deputy administrator Shana Dale. "We don't know as much about the polar regions."
The US has already announced plans to develop new spacecraft to travel to the Moon and land on its surface for the first time since the last Apollo flight there in 1972.
It also plans to provide a communications system linking Earth and the Moon. 
But NASA doesn't plan to go to the Moon alone. The US will look for international and commercial partners to share the expense and possibly provide components such as additional power systems, living quarters and resources for lunar surface travel. 
NASA is not expecting a budget increase to pay for the program. Rather, it will transition funds currently being used to support the space shuttle into the Moon exploration program as the shuttle fleet is phased out. 
The shuttles are set to be retired in 2010. By that time, NASA plans to have finished building the space station, leaving the Moon initiative as a successor to both programs.

Earthquakes and crystallising lava are clues that volcanoes are about to blow, new research shows
Better predictions of when volcanoes are going to erupt may be possible with a new computer model developed by Australian scientists.
Dr Alina Hale from the Earth Systems Science Computational Centre at the University of Queensland and colleagues have been investigating a type of repetitive earthquake that typically occurs before volcanic eruptions.
"Quite often these long-period earthquakes are observed before a volcano does something nasty," says Hales.
"It's basically an indication that something's going to happen, but no-one has actually worked out how they occur."
Recently, scientists have begun to think the quakes may be caused by areas of instability in volcanic lava called shear bands. But until now there has been no accurate way to explain the connection.
"It's been eluding us exactly what the volcano is trying to tell us with these signals," Hale says.
"People have had a go at trying to correlate shear bands with these earthquakes, but so far it hasn't been convincing."
At the Australian Institute of Physics conference in Brisbane today, Hale described how her new model incorporates processes such as the formation of crystals in lava to make the correlation more precise.
"It was a case of putting two and two together to pinpoint how these signals are being generated," she says.
When Hale used real-world data from Soufri&egrave;re Hills Volcano, which devastated the island of Montserrat, her model confirmed that shear bands were being generated at the depths where long-period earthquakes occur.
More research needs to be done to further refine scientists' understanding of the processes behind long-period earthquakes, Hale says, but the new model could be an important development.
"We're now getting closer to understanding where and why these signals occur," she says.
"Basically it could potentially give us the ability to predict eruptions."

Neanderthal foot bones in a block of cemented sand and clay from the El Sidr�n cave in Spain
Neanderthals had different ethnic groups, often starved and probably practised cannibalism.
That's the news from a recent study of the skeletal remains from eight Neanderthals who lived 43,000 years ago in northwest Spain.
The findings, published online in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, raise questions about Neanderthal lifestyle.
Why, for instance, would they have resorted to cannibalism? What harsh conditions caused the wear and tear evident on surviving bones?
There are two possible reasons why Neanderthals would have dined on their dead, according to lead author Dr Antonio Rosas, a scientist in the palaeobiology department at the National Museum of Natural Sciences in Madrid.
"One is that they needed to eat whatever was at hand, including human flesh, because ecological conditions for their survivorship, such as extreme cold weather and no meat from hunting, were really hard," Rosas says.
The other possibility, he says, is that "this was done in the context of something we may think of as symbolic".
Rosas suggests the virtual absence of animal remains at the site, a cave called El Sidr&oacute;n, may point either to ritual killings or unsuccessful hunting. Neanderthals are thought to have subsisted primarily on meat.
Toothy clues
The Neanderthals studied ranged in age from infancy to young adulthood. Their teeth revealed that tooth growth often stopped abruptly due to illness or malnutrition. 
Adolescence in general appears to have been a particularly hard time, possibly due to separation from parents and the resulting need for self-sufficiency.
Cut marks associated with butchery were found on some of the remains, particularly those of the younger individuals.
The skeletal remains also reveal that these Neanderthals possess a different bone structure than individuals found elsewhere in Europe.
It appears that Neanderthals fell into at least two basic ethnic groups that coincided with their north-south geographical distribution.
Southern Neanderthals from the Iberian Peninsula, the Balkans, the Middle East and Italy had broader and shorter faces than northern Neanderthals from populations living north of the Pyrenees, the Alps, portions of Asia and central and eastern Europe, the researchers say.
Scientists are now debating whether interbreeding with modern humans occurred and why all of these Neanderthal groups appear to have gone extinct.
"It does look, from a variety of data, that Neanderthals were subject to episodes of extreme scarcity, with which their cultural and social systems sometimes couldn't cope," says Professor Steven Kuhn, an anthropologist at the University of Arizona.
"There could also be a link between boom-and-bust subsistence and occasional cannibalism."
Sharing out the chores
Kuhn and colleague Professor Mary Stiner theorise that modern humans better divided labour along the lines of gender and age.
Instead of everyone working toward the next big kill, women and children in early modern human groups devised other food-obtaining strategies, such as gathering fruits and nuts.
Such diversification underlies our success, even today, they say.
"It is clear that the kinds of cooperative, diversified economies practised by recent hunter gatherers are 'underwritten by' our sophisticated cognitive and communicative abilities," says Kuhn.
"That's what allows people to negotiate and maintain their complex patterns of dependency and cooperation, keep each other in line, etc. But whether the cognitive development is cause or consequence isn't clear to us."

Transparent module of skinny sliver cells, which provide a greater surface area to capture sunlight
The cost of producing solar panels could be sliced by more than 60% thanks to technology being developed by Australian researchers, physicists heard today.
Professor Andrew Blakers, director of the Centre for Sustainable Energy Systems at the Australian National University, says 'sliver technology' could reduce the price of solar power to below the current retail price of electricity.
And he says this could make it cost-effective for householders to buy solar panels rather than electricity from the grid.
Blakers describes the latest refinements in the technology at the Australian Institute of Physics conference in Brisbane.
The system works by taking a standard solar cell about 1 millimetre thick and cutting it into tiny slices that are just 120 micrometres wide.
"Imagine a standard solar cell is a loaf of bread. When you put it out in the sun it generates energy based on its surface area," Blakers says.
"Now imagine you cut that loaf up into slices and lay them horizontally. You get a lot more surface area."
This technique allows researchers to use much smaller amounts of expensive silicon to generate the same amount of electricity.
This can also keep manufacturing costs down, as all the processing steps normally carried out on solar cells are done while the slices are still in the 'loaf'.
"We're looking at major reductions in the total cost without the need for major scientific breakthroughs," Blakers says.
"It's about doing a good engineering job using known scientific principles, in contrast to some other technologies."
The sliver technology is also efficient at converting sunlight to electricity, he says.
In recent months, the researchers have achieved efficiencies over 20%, making it the world's most efficient commercial thin-film solar cell.
But further developments would be needed, such as figuring out how to cut thinner slivers, he says.
Blakers invented the technology with colleague Dr Klaus Weber and developed it with funding from energy supplier Origin Energy and the Australian Research Council.
Blakers and Weber won the Australian Institute of Physics' Walsh Medal for their work.

Would you use car tyres made using nanotechnology?
The public has a neutral attitude towards the risk of nanotechnology and will accept some risk from specific products if their benefits are high, a new US survey has found.
The first large-scale survey of its kind is published in the current issue of the journal Nature Nanotechnology.
"Our results showed that nanotechnology was seen as relatively neutral," say Professor Steven Currall of University College London and colleagues.
The survey found people perceived nanotechnology as less risky and more beneficial than a number of other technologies such as genetically modified organisms, pesticides, chemical disinfectants and human genetic engineering. 
But they saw it as less beneficial than solar power, vaccinations, hydroelectric power and computer display screens.
The researchers also studied people's acceptance of four hypothetical nanotechnology applications - a drug, a skin lotion, car tyres and refrigerator gas coolant.
The researchers defined the environmental and health risks of each application and they found that people judged risks and benefits as a package.
"When the benefits are low, consumers are more concerned about risks than when benefits are high," they say.
The researchers say if the public is to have a measured and informed response to nanotechnology in the future, they need easy access to information on risks and benefits.
"Now is the time to educate the public aggressively with facts about the risks and benefits of nanotechnology," they say.
But Australian researcher, Dr Stephen Healy of the School of History and Philosophy of Science at the University of New South Wales, says most people don't just trade-off risks and benefits to decide whether to accept a technology.
People's trust in decision-makers also play an important role, says Healy, whose research interests include risk and public involvement in decision-making on new technologies.
He also says the researchers mistakenly suggest risks are a property of technologies themselves in isolation.
But whether or not nanoparticles present a risk, for example, will be partly determined by what people do with them, says Healy.
"It's not simply a matter of public perception and it's not simply a matter of the way they're made, it's a matter of the way they're used," he says.
Healy is not surprised the survey found the public has a neutral view on nanotechnology.
"Nanotechnology is very much an emergent technology and the existing commercial applications are very low profile to say the least," he says.
Professor Jim Falk of the Australian Centre for Science, Innovation and Society at the University of Melbourne, says the survey findings call for genuine public engagement on new technologies like nanotechnology.
"We have no national capacity in Australia for engaging the public in those issues except through the media and commissions of inquiry," he says.
Over 5500 people were involved in the web and telephone survey, which was funded by the US National Science Foundation and Rice University in Texas.

This gully deposit, which scientists say is evidence of water on Mars, formed sometime between August 1999 and February 2004. So does this mean that water is still flowing today?
Photographs of Mars show features that most likely were made by water flowing on the planet today, says the US space agency.
"No one expected what we found today," says Dr Kenneth Edgett, a scientist with Malin Space Science Systems in San Diego. "We are talking about liquid water that is present on Mars right now."
The images were taken by NASA's Mars Global Surveyor, which had been studying the Red Planet for a decade before an apparent mission-ending failure last month.
The discovery raises the prospect that life could exist on Mars today, says Dr Michael Meyer, lead scientist for NASA's Mars Exploration Program.
The agency has mounted a series of increasingly sophisticated missions to look for signs of past water on Mars in hopes of identifying areas that could have been suitable for life to form.
"Maybe we no longer have to think about following the water, but watching the water," Edgett says.
The conclusion that water flows on Mars today is based on photographs the Global Surveyor took of gullies etched in the Martian soil.
Two sites in particular caught researchers' eyes because there were noticeable changes between pictures taken six years ago and ones snapped in 2004 and 2005.
Both show the gullies had filled with a light-coloured deposit, which is believed to be frozen water.
Scientists believe the water emanated from deep within the planet and gradually welled up toward the surface. Once it encountered the frigid Martian air, however, it froze, forming an ice dam.
Water continued to build up underground until there was enough pressure to burst the ice cap and allow a jet of water to flow down the channels.
The amount of water is about what would be needed to fill five to 10 swimming pools, Edgett says.
The findings will be followed up by a new higher-resolution camera aboard NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, which began its mission last month.
The Global Surveyor team also found new impact craters, raising the prospect that meteorite hits are a concern as NASA begins to think about sending human explorers to Mars.

Big brown bats, like this one, navigate over long distances using the Earth's magnetic field as a guide
Scientists believe a species of bat has an in-built magnetic compass to find its way home over long distances, in addition to its famous echolocation, which guides it around its neighbourhood. 
Princeton University batologists publish their findings today in the journal Nature.
The researchers used radio telemetry aboard a small aircraft to track big brown bats (Eptesicus fuscus) that were released 20 kilometres north of their home.
They first tested a control group of bats, which headed due south towards the roost without a problem. 
Two other groups of bats were then exposed to a false magnetic field for 90 minutes, 45 minutes before and 45 minutes after sunset. 
One field was 90&deg; clockwise and the other was 90&deg; anticlockwise from magnetic north.
The point of this was to see whether the bats used Earth's magnetic field as a guide and, if so, to see whether the bats used sunset or the stars as an additional cue. 
The 'clockwise' group of bats flew due east, while the 'anticlockwise' group went due west, suggesting that they had been using a magnetic compass that may have been calibrated by the sunset. 
But some of the bats corrected their course and arrived home safely, which implies that, like homing pigeons, they can make a fix if a navigational glitch occurs.
World's longest bat tongue?
Meanwhile, another study, also published by Nature, sheds light on a remarkable bat species whose tongues are one and half times longer than their bodies. 
The nectar bat (Anoura fistulata) lives in the cloud forests of the Ecuadorean Andes, feeding on flowers whose nectar is hidden at the end of long funnels.
Nathan Muchhala, of the University of Miami, suggests the extreme length of the bat's tongue coevolved with the long flowers of the plant.

A message sent using entangled, or spooky, particles of light has been beamed across the ocean
Scientists have used quantum physics to zap an encrypted message more than 140 kilometres between two Spanish islands.
Professor Anton Zeilinger from the University of Vienna and an international team of scientists used 'spooky' pulses of light to send the message.
They say this is an important step towards making international communications more secure.
Zeilinger described the study this week at the Australian Institute of Physics meeting in Brisbane.
The photons they sent were linked together through a process known as quantum entanglement.
This means that their properties remained tightly entwined or entangled, even when separated by large distances, a property Einstein called spooky.
The group's achievement is important for the emerging field of quantum cryptography, which aims to use properties such as entanglement to send encrypted messages.
Research groups around the world are working in this field. But until now they have only been able to send messages relatively short distances, limiting their usefulness.
Zeilinger's team wants to be able to beam the messages to satellites in space, so they could theoretically be relayed anywhere on the planet.
To test their system, the team went to Tenerife in the Canary Islands, where the European Space Agency operates a telescope specifically designed to communicate with satellites.
Instead of pointing the telescope at the stars, Zeilinger says, the scientists turned it to the horizontal and aimed it towards a photon sending station 144 kilometres away on the neighbouring island of La Palma.
"Very broadly speaking, we were able to establish a quantum communication connection," he says.
"We worried a lot about whether atmospheric turbulence would destroy the quantum states. But it turned out to work much better than we feared."
The results suggest it should be possible to send encrypted photons to a satellite orbiting 300 or 400 kilometres above the Earth, he says.
"This is our hope. We believe that such a system is feasible."
The next step is to try the system out with an actual satellite, a project which is likely to involve the European Space Agency and others.
"This is about developing quantum communications on a grand scale,"
Zeilinger says.
His team expects to publish its results soon.

Embryonic stem cells could be grown into islet cells to treat diabetes, say researchers
Australian stem cell researchers will start negotiating with IVF clinics to access human eggs following this week's landmark decision to overturn a ban on creating cloned embryos specifically for scientific research.
Despite objections from Prime Minister John Howard and the new leader of the opposition, Kevin Rudd, the lower house of the Australian parliament last night voted to allow the process.
This paves the way for laws to implement the recommendations of the Lockhart review into stem cell research.
"I think it's fantastic news. It's raised the morale of the scientists," says Professor Alan Trounson, international director of the Australian Stem Cell Centre. "We're thrilled."
His team wants to use somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) to investigate options for disease diagnosis and treatment once the new laws are enacted.
SCNT involves the creation of an embryo by inserting a nucleus from a patient's body cell into an egg cell that has had its nucleus removed.
Under the new laws such an embryo would be permitted to grow for 14 days and provide scientists with stem cells for use in research.
But the first step for researchers like Trounson is to get hold of a ready supply of human eggs and he's not sure whether there will be enough.
"We're looking forward to seeing whether we can obtain eggs for these studies. That will be the critical component I think," he says.
"We'll be talking to our colleagues in the infertility clinics because they will be the connection to obtaining human eggs for making embryonic stem cells."
Eggs a limiting factor
Neuroscientist Professor Peter Schofield of the Lockhart review agrees that finding eggs will be a key issue.
"In practice we will probably find that eggs may be a limiting factor," he says.

Gorillas' social habits make it easy for the Ebola virus to spread among and between groups, researchers say
The Ebola virus may have killed more than 5000 gorillas in West Africa, enough to send them into extinction if people continue to hunt them too, researchers say.
The virus is spreading from one group of the already endangered animals to another, the international team of experts report today in the journal Science. 
And it appears to be spreading faster than it is among humans. 
"The Zaire strain of Ebola virus killed about 5000 gorillas in our study area alone," write primatologist Dr Magdalena Bermejo of the University of Barcelona in Spain and colleagues.
Ebola haemorrhagic fever is one of the most virulent viruses ever seen, killing 50-90% of victims.
The World Health Organization says that it killed 1200 people infected between its discovery in 1976 and 2004.
The virus is transmitted by direct contact with blood, organs or other bodily fluids. There is no cure or good treatment, although several groups are working on vaccines. 
Several experts have noted that chimpanzees and gorillas are also killed by the virus, and suspect that people may have caught it from infected apes, perhaps when hunting them. 
But it is not clear whether the gorillas are infecting one another, or being repeatedly infected and reinfected by another species of animal, perhaps a bat. 
Bermejo's team has been studying a group of western gorillas in the Lossi Sanctuary in northwest Republic of Congo.
"By 2002 we had identified 10 social groups with 143 individuals," they write. 
Quick deaths
In 2001 and 2002, several outbreaks of Ebola had begun killing people along the Gabon-Congo border.
By October 2002, the researchers had found 32 dead gorillas, and of the 12 they tested for Ebola, nine were positive. 
"[Bermejo] knew these animals individually, and in the course of three months they all died," says Dr Peter Walsh, an ecologist at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, who worked on the study. 
Eventually the researchers counted 221 dead gorillas. Based on what they and other experts knew, Walsh extrapolated what the total impact must be to come up with the estimate of 5500 gorillas killed by Ebola in that area. 
He says no one knows precisely how many gorillas are in the world and how many have died.
"But I know what's the typical mortality rate in those areas that are affected. It's an educated guess. A quarter of the gorillas in the world have died from Ebola in the last 12 years. It's huge," Walsh says. 
"Add commercial hunting to the mix, and we have a recipe for rapid ecological extinction," the researchers write. 
Their report supports a study published in July that showed gorillas were spreading the virus within their social groups. 
"Our work is complementary to that; we have shown it is spreading between groups," Walsh says. 
Walsh says gorilla groups share territories, often eating fruit from the same tree, although at different times. Faeces from a sick gorilla could easily infect other gorillas. 
Gorillas and chimpanzees also touch and handle the bodies of other apes when they find them, something known to transmit Ebola between humans. 
"The issue here is that there is a certain amount of work that needs to be done to take these vaccines that already exist and put them into gorillas," Walsh says.

Africa is suffering from a double blow: malaria and HIV. Now scientists say that one could exacerbate the other
Malaria may be helping to spread HIV across Africa, the continent hardest hit by AIDS, scientists say. 
The way the two diseases interact greatly expands the prevalence of both among people in sub-Saharan Africa, a team of scientists say today in the journal Science.
Malaria, a mosquito-borne disease caused by a parasite, greatly boosts viral load, the amount of HIV in the blood of infected people, they say.
This makes them more likely to infect a sexual partner with HIV.
"Higher viral load causes more HIV transmission, and malaria causes high HIV viral load," says lead study author Dr Laith Abu-Raddad of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle and the University of Washington. 
Abu-Raddad, an AIDS researcher, estimates that malaria has helped HIV infect hundreds of thousands and perhaps millions of people in sub-Saharan Africa.
At the same time, HIV fuels malaria's spread because HIV-infected people are more susceptible to malaria as a result of HIV ravaging the immune system, the body's natural defences, the researchers say. 
AIDS and malaria are concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa. And Abu-Raddad says scientists were puzzled when they realised that the risky sexual behaviour by people in the region was not by itself sufficient to explain the swift spread of HIV, so other factors must be involved. 
They focused their work on Kisumu, a Kenyan city by Lake Victoria where HIV and malaria are both common.
They say 5% of HIV infections can be blamed on the increased HIV viral load due to malaria, and 10% of adult malaria cases can be blamed on HIV. 
Since 1980, 8500 more people became HIV positive, and there were 980,000 more episodes of malaria (a person can get it more than once) in a city whose adult population is 200,000, the study found.
Public health efforts
The findings have implications for public health efforts, Abu-Raddad says, showing the importance for authorities to tackle these diseases together. 
Of the 39.5 million people worldwide infected with HIV, 24.7 million are in the poor countries of sub-Saharan Africa. About 2.1 million of the world's 2.9 million AIDS deaths in the past year were also in this region.
Malaria kills more than a million people annually, mostly young children in sub-Saharan Africa. 
The researchers produced their results with a mathematical model using HIV and malaria infection data gathered in Malawi by Dr James Kublin of the Hutchinson Center.
This enabled them to quantify for the first time the synergy between malaria on HIV and its toll on people. 
Scientists previously determined that a lack of male circumcision and the incidence of genital herpes also were facilitating the spread of HIV.
Abu-Raddad notes that circumcised men are much less likely to get HIV, and that genital herpes opens a door for HIV to infect a person. 
Abu-Raddad says malaria now can be considered a third serious factor facilitating the spread of HIV. 
The two diseases drive one another even though they have different modes of transmission - malaria by mosquito and HIV predominantly by sexual intercourse - Abu-Raddad notes. 
He says once a person with HIV gets malaria, his or her viral load goes up and stays higher for six to eight weeks, making the person far more infectious to others.

Just because you know someone well doesn't mean you can choose the right present, new research shows
If you really want an mp3 player this Christmas, but your beloved buys you a radio, don't be too disappointed.
New international research suggests knowing someone very well actually makes predicting his or her tastes more difficult.
The study, published in the December issue of the Journal of Consumer Research, goes some way to explaining why people often miss the mark and end up buying weird, inappropriate, or just plain bad gifts for the ones they love most.
Researchers from the Netherlands and Belgium invited 35 couples who had been in a relationship for at least six months to predict their partners' taste in furniture.
All 70 participants were first asked to choose their own favourite bedroom suites from 30 on offer.
Half were then asked to predict their partner's favourites while the other half were asked to predict the favourites of a stranger, person X, who in reality was their partner.
The researchers conclude that knowing a lot about your partner can actually get in the way of choosing the perfect gift.
Not only do people become overconfident that they know what their partner will like, but their tendency to assume their tastes are very similar mean they often miss the cue that they're getting it wrong.
"Our results suggest that familiarity causes [people] to put an overly heavy weight on pre-stored information," write the authors. 
"The pre-stored information that people possess about their partner is extensive. This elaborate knowledge makes predictors overly confident, such that they do not even attend to product-specific attitude feedback." 
Australian professor of psychology at the University of New South Wales, Joseph Forgas, says it's hardly surprising that people get it wrong when buying presents for others, as they often get it wrong when buying things for themselves.
The possible reason? Affluence.
"People already pretty much have everything that has real utility value for them, so most discretionary purchases are to buy items we don't really need, ie goods that have only symbolic, identity value and only minimal utility value," he says.
"Such purchases are mainly to make statements about ourselves. And people are not very good in figuring out what statement to make, and what to make it with.
"For example, some people may think that buying a red Ferrari signals power and wealth, while to others it may just signal sexual inadequacy and impotence."

Could automated answers to your IT questions help reduce frustration when things go wrong?
The next time you email the IT help desk, you may find yourself dealing with a computer, not a human.
If a new system that Australian researchers are developing takes off, 'intelligent' computers will generate their own answers to your queries.
The research by computer scientists Dr Yuval Marom and Professor Ingrid Zukerman of Monash University in Melbourne will be presented at the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Hyderabad, India next month.
"Help desk operators are generally dealing with the same thing over and over again," says Marom.
And he says many emails can be answered by mixing and matching parts of generic responses, which the researchers' software will generate.
It can also help automate answers that require a more personalised response, says Marom.
The software was developed by analysing patterns between a set of 30,000 genuine pairs of questions and answers from an email help desk and generalising relationships between them.
The emails came from the large international computer hardware company involved in the Australian Research Council Linkage grant that funded the research.
The software defines several categories of questions that can be answered by generic responses, such as standard advice on how to arrange for a computer to be repaired.
Then there are questions that require more specific answers. 
These involve the system directly matching the words in the question to answers in the database, using similar technology to Google.
But unlike Google, the customer can enter in a much longer query, describing the problem in detail and what they have already done to try and solve it.
Speed and accuracy
Marom says the benefit of automated responses is that they can be obtained at "Google speed" instead of having to wait longer for a human to get around to typing a response.
But how accurate are the answers?
Marom says the system can be set so that it only fires off an automated answer when it has a certain level of confidence the answer is accurate.
But customers will tolerate some inaccuracy or incomplete answers as long as they are sufficiently knowledgeable, he says.
For example, if the system gives the customer the right webpage for downloading some software but tells them the wrong procedure, the customer might still find the automated answer useful.
And if they get fed up they can always opt out and contact a human instead with the click a button, says Marom.
So far ratings by staff in Marom's department suggest the automated answers are pretty good when compared to the answers humans give.
But he says the next step is to evaluate the system online with a real-life email help desk.
Accuracy and jobs
Marom says that automated help desk software will cost jobs. But he says some humans will always be required to answer questions the system is not confident of answering.
Exactly how many humans will depend on where the confidence levels are set as it's a trade-off. 
If the confidence level is set too high, the system requires more humans to answer the harder questions. 
If the confidence level is set too low, it could risk annoying customers.
Marom says the system could be applied in many areas from tax queries to health queries.
Although of course, he says, the level of confidence for answering health queries would have to be pretty high.

Fossils found on New Zealand's South Island belong to an ancient mammal lineage
Palaeontologists have found remains of one of the most primitive type of land mammal in the world, a mouse-sized creature that's unlike any mammal alive today.
The find, at the edge of a swampy lake on New Zealand's South Island, not only fills a gap of the nation's fossil record, it may also help us understand more about the origin of mammals worldwide.
Researchers, led by Trevor Worthy from Australia's University of Adelaide, publish their results today online in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Many types of mammals evolved in the Mesozoic period when the dinosaurs dominated, says co-author Alan Tennyson, a palaeontologist from the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa.
But most of those early lineages are now extinct and mammals living today fall into only one of three groups: placentals, marsupials or monotremes.
But this latest find, in sediments deposited 16-19 million years ago, doesn't fit into any of these groups.
"This is an incredible find. We never expected to find anything like this," says Tennyson.
"What's so exciting about this fossil mammal is that it is from one of those ancient lineages that we thought had become extinct much earlier. This will help us understand more about the origin of mammals worldwide," he says.
The find is particularly significant for New Zealand as there are virtually no fossils of terrestrial vertebrates between 65 million years ago, when an asteroid impact is thought to have wiped out the dinosaurs, and about 1 million years ago.
In other parts of the world many different mammals evolved to replace dinosaurs as the dominant species.
But in New Zealand the only terrestrial vertebrates that seemed to have evolved were reptiles, frogs, and birds - not mammals.
That's despite the fact that New Zealand's landmass separated from Gondwana after many mammals had evolved.
"The suggestion has been that giant birds, like the extinct Haast eagle and the moa, filled the ecological niches that mammals like tigers and grazing animals did elsewhere," says Tennyson.
"But this is a very primitive mammal and it's unlikely to have lived here for 60 million years without diversification. So it opens the possibility that there may be bigger mammals to be found."
The researchers say the discovery implies the existence of one or more 'ghost lineages' and suggests that mammals may have existed on New Zealand more than 125 million years ago.
That may contradict an alternative theory for the lack of fossil evidence for terrestrial mammals: that New Zealand was completely submerged about 25 million years ago and that all of its animals and plants arrived from nearby landmasses. 
But the paper suggests that the discovery, along with other Mesozoic survivors such as the lizard-like tuatara and New Zealand's primitive frogs, confirms that at least some land remained above water throughout the period.

A colonial siphonophore, which grows to 1.5 centimetres, found off the coast of Broome in northwestern Australia
A Jurassic 'shrimp' thought extinct 50 million years ago has been found in Australian waters, a census of marine life shows.
Neoglyphea neocaledonica, found on an underwater peak in the Coral Sea, is the oldest marine organism listed in the 2006 Census of Marine Life, a global effort involving 70 nations.
The census, which is due for completion in 2010, also found marine creatures thriving by a record hot volcanic vent in the Atlantic and in dark waters under thick Antarctic ice.
Researchers also found 150 new types of fish among 500 new marine species, including furry crabs and a lobster off Madagascar.
Many species were found in places long thought too hostile for life including by a vent spewing liquids at 407&deg;C and other habitats that are dark, cold or deep.
Some places seem as inhospitable as planets such as Mars or Venus, the researchers say. 
"The age of discovery is not over," says Jesse Ausubel, a program manager at the US Sloan Foundation, a sponsor of the 10-year census.
Among discoveries in 2006 are shrimps, clams and bacteria living by the searing 407&deg;C vent on the floor of the Atlantic Ocean north of Ascension Island, the hottest sea vent ever documented and more than hot enough to melt lead.
"This is the most extreme environment and there is plenty of life around it," says Professsor Chris German, of the UK's National Oceanography Centre and a leader of the Atlantic survey.
He says one big puzzle is how creatures cope with shifts in temperatures. For instance, water on the seabed at 3000 metres is just 2&deg;C yet many creatures withstand near-boiling temperatures of up to 80&deg;C from the thermal vent.
German says it is a bit like a person agreeing to live in a blistering sauna and be hosed at random with freezing water. 
Scientists have not yet probed how hardy the microbes nearest the hottest part of the vent are.
Another expedition found crustaceans, jellyfish and single-celled creatures living in darkness in the Weddell Sea off Antarctica under ice 700 metres thick and 200 kilometres from open water. Most of those creatures are new to science. 
"You can think of it as a cave, one of the remotest caves on Earth," Ausubel says of findings by a robot camera. 
"Wherever we've gone on Earth we've continued to find life," German says, adding that recent discoveries could be encouraging for the search for life elsewhere in the universe.
The biggest new species in the census is probably a 1.8 kilomgram rock lobster found off Madagascar. A furry crab, dubbed a 'Yeti crab', was also found off Easter Island.
In the longest migration ever documented, census researchers tracked sooty shearwater birds on a 70,000 kilometre flight sweeping round the Pacific in 200 days, an average 350 kilometres a day.

Ten studies published since 1999 have identified the human papillomavirus in breast tumours. But more studies are needed to show how closely the two are linked
Breast cancer could be sexually transmitted, says a researcher who has found the same virus that causes cervical cancer in breast cancer tumours from Australian women.
Emeritus Professor James Lawson of the University of New South Wales and colleagues have found the same form of the human papillomavirus (HPV) associated with cervical cancer in almost half the breast tumour samples they tested.
It's the first study of its kind in Australia, although international studies have also found cervical cancer-related HPV in breast cancer cells.
He says while the evidence is far from conclusive, "it's possible and totally worthy of investigation" to suspect that HPV could also cause breast cancer.
Lawson says it's possible that HPV is spread by sexual activity or during showers or baths, when the virus could be transferred from the genital area to the breasts via the nipple ducts.
"We know that the virus explodes out of the cell and is spread by touch, so it's fairly obvious that it could be spread by sexual activity to the breast, you could also argue that it would be spread by washing and bathing," he says.
Lawson says more research is needed to establish whether HPV is actually causing the breast cancer or if women with breast cancer are more prone to infection with the virus.
Younger women
Lawson and colleagues last year published the results of a DNA analysis which found 24 out of 50 breast cancer samples also tested positive to HPV 18, the same form of the virus implicated in breast cancer.
A subsequent review, published in the journal Future Microbiology in June this year, found various forms of high-risk HPV had been identified in 10 separate breast cancer studies since 1999.
In a letter published online in the British Journal of Cancer last month Lawson reports that a review of the 2005 study found women with HPV positive breast cancers were on average about eight years younger than those whose tumours did not test positive to the virus.
He says this lends weight to the sexual transmission theory, because HPV is more common in younger women who are more likely than older women to have had multiple sexual partners, something he describes as a "post-pill phenomenon".
Lawson says it isn't the first time a virus has been associated with breast cancer. 
The mouse mammary tumour virus, which causes breast cancer in mice, has been known about since the 1930s, and in a 2004 study Lawson reported finding a genetically similar version of the virus in Australian women.
Lawson says if it's true that HPV can cause breast cancer as well cervical cancer, the introduction of the cervical cancer vaccine, developed by Australian of the Year Professor Ian Frazer, should also cut rates of breast cancer.
He says he is currently pushing for a study into this.
"The real proof of all this will be the vaccine, but you'll have to wait [a long time] for [the results]," he says.
"It makes sense to follow that group of girls, and when some of them get breast cancer, to see if any of them are HPV positive breast cancers.
"Theoretically the answer should be no."
Doubts
But chief executive officer of Cancer Council Australia, Professor Ian Olver, says while it's possible that a virus could cause breast cancer the existing studies are small and inconclusive.
"What we've got is small studies that have found an association between HPV and breast cancer ... but they haven't shown anything that could say it's causal," he says.
"I think you need much bigger studies and a mechanism by which HPV was implicated in the development."
A recent article published online ahead of appearing in the journal The Breast failed to find evidence of HPV in a study of 81 Swiss women.
"Our analysis could not support a role of HPV in breast carcinoma," the study concludes.

New research shows that the outermost layer of the atmosphere will lose 3% of its density over the coming decade, a sign of the far-reaching impacts of greenhouse gas emissions. As the density declines, orbiting satellites and space junk will experience less drag
Human increases in carbon dioxide emissions are thinning the Earth's outer atmosphere, making it easier to keep the space station aloft but prolonging the life of dangerous space junk, scientists say. 
"It's a bit of a two-edge sword," says Stanley Solomon, a US scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado.
"In the future, it will be a little bit easier to keep the space station, for instance, in orbit. It will need a little bit less fuel," he says.
"On the other hand, it will give space junk a much longer lifetime," he told a meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco. 
Solomon is the co-author of a study presented this week that found the burning of fossil fuels and increase of carbon dioxide emissions will make the Earth's outer atmosphere above 100 kilometres 3% less dense by 2017.
The study, which is also published in the journal Geophysical Research Letters, found a decrease in density of about 5% between 1970 and 2000. 
Although scientists say that carbon dioxide contributes to global warming closer to Earth's surface, in the thinner outer atmosphere where spacecraft orbit, a cooling effect takes place. Solar activity also affects the outer atmosphere. 
As this outermost region becomes less dense, it produces less drag on satellites, spacecraft and tens of thousands of pieces of discarded space debris from previous missions orbiting at about 400 kilometres from Earth's surface.
"These objects are now experiencing less drag proportionally than they did 30 years ago," Solomon says. 
A steady stream of space launches since Sputnik's in 1957 has left about 10,000 orbiting objects bigger than the size of a grapefruit, and 100,000 larger than a centimetre, says Dr Kent Tobiska, president and chief scientist of Space Environment Technologies in Pacific Palisades, California. 
The International Space Station now in orbit must readjust its path several times a year to avoid colliding with such debris; a chance hit with a spacewalking astronaut could prove fatal.

A researcher has suggested that the origin of Aboriginal language can be traced back to a time when Australia and New Guinea were one
Aboriginal languages may be much older than people think, argues a linguistic anthropologist who says they originated as far back as the end of the last ice age around 13,000 years ago.
This challenges existing thinking, which suggests Aboriginal languages developed from a proto-language that spread through Australia 5000 to 6000 years ago.
The key to the new hypothesis is prehistoric Australia's single land mass 13,000 to 28,000 years ago, when New Guinea and Tasmania were still attached, says Dr Mark Clendon in the journal Current Anthropology.
Clendon says the continent, known as Sahul, was relatively densely populated on the land bridge connecting northern Australia to New Guinea, now separated by the Arafura Sea.
The other populated area was along what is now Australia's eastern seaboard.
The two population groups were separated by a vast, cold, windswept, arid stretch of land that covered most of the continent, says Clendon, who was with the Batchelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary Education when he published the research.
The eastern group spoke a tongue that became what is known today as Pama Nyungan and includes languages like Pitjantjatjara, Yolngu and Warlpiri.
And the Arafurans spoke another family of languages used in northern Australia today.
"What I'm suggesting is that Pama Nyungan and non-Pama Nyungan languages go back about 13,000 years to when there was a land bridge between New Guinea and Australia," he says.
Until now, the reason why these two Aboriginal language groups are so different, each with a distinct grammar and vocabulary, has been a mystery.
Climate change
Around 11,000 years ago what was the Arafura plain was flooded by rising seas as the ice age ended.
This caused the northern people to migrate into either New Guinea or to northern parts of Australia.
Meanwhile, increased rainfall and warmer temperatures made inland parts of the continent more habitable and sparked a westward migration of eastern dwellers.
This introduced their language group to more central areas of Australia.
Both groups maintained their distinct languages, Clendon says. 
His hypothesis provides an alternative picture to the traditional view that 6000 years ago a single proto-language spread from the Gulf of Carpentaria around Australia, eventually giving rise to existing Aboriginal languages.
"We know about changes in climate and sea levels at the end of the Pleistocene era," Clendon says.
"I'm suggesting the way languages are configured in Australia today are a result of those changes that happened at the end of the ice age."
Provocative but unconvincing
Writing in a reply to Clendon's article, Professor Nicholas Evans, an expert in Aboriginal languages from the University of Melbourne, describes Clendon's hypothesis as "fresh and provocative".
However, he says there are flaws in the argument, including that there is only weak evidence of similarities between southern New Guinea and northern Aboriginal languages.
Evans says he remains to be convinced about Clendon's proposal.
"[But] it adds a welcome alternative to a field in which we are still a long way from having any clear picture of the unimaginably long human occupation of Sahul," he says.

Air pollution in Asia is increasing rainfall in parts of Australia. But scientists are concerned that could be reversed when the pollution is cleared up, therefore plunging more of Australia into drought
More of Australia could become affected by drought if its nearest neighbours start reducing air pollution, a study suggests.
Dr Leon Rotstayn of CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research says a new computer climate model shows aerosol pollution in Asia is having a long-distance effect on weather in Australia.
He says the modelling shows that the airborne haze made up of tiny particles from industrial and domestic pollution is cooling the land and oceans around Asia.
The haze isn't travelling to Australia. But it's been changing the balance of wind and temperature between Asia and Australia, causing heavier rainfalls in central and northwest parts of Australia.
"What has been observed in the last 50 years is that it has been getting drier in the south and east of Australia and wetter in the northwest and centre," he says.
"Our pilot modelling results suggest that the Asian haze may be driving that trend towards more rain." 
Getting rid of the haze could reverse that pattern, he says.
The research, which will be published in the  Journal of Geophysical Research early next year, is the first time researchers have tried to demonstrate the effect of aerosols on Australia's climate.
Particles
The pollution factored into the CSIRO model includes industrial and domestic emissions of particles such as black carbon, from burning diesel, and sulfide particles from coal.
Rotstayn says this aerosol pollution has a cooling effect because it forms a blanket that keeps the Sun's radiation from reaching the surface of the Earth.
The particles also cause thicker and more persistent clouds, which reflect heat back into space.
"The cooling effect of aerosols is a combination of the direct effect of stopping sunlight getting through and the indirect effect whereby the aerosols make clouds more effective," he says.
"The aerosol haze is cooling Asia and the oceans around [it] and that's affecting the monsoonal winds which bring the summer-time rainfall to the northern parts of Australia."
He says the trend could be reversed, with serious implications for Australia, if Asian emissions are reduced.
"Sooner or later those emissions will be cleaned up and a trend of increasing rainfall in the northwest and centre could be reversed," he says.
"This is potentially serious, because the northwest and centre are the only parts of Australia where rainfall has been increasing."
Not just a greenhouse problem
The study shows that we shouldn't underestimate the impact of aerosols on Australia's climate, Rotstayn says.
"We don't really have much aerosol pollution in Australia most of the time so there's been an assumption that aerosols are not very important to Australian climate. 
"But when we did these simulations ... without the aerosols we got a completely different rainfall response over Australia.
"That's suggesting [aerosols are] something we have to take very seriously if we're going to be able to predict climate change and not simply treat it as solely a greenhouse gas problem, because it clearly is not."

Prefer to stay up late? It's your inner creativity speaking
Do your best work at night? Take solace as new research suggests that night owls are more likely to be creative thinkers.
Scientists can't yet fully explain why evening types appear to be more creative, but they suggest it could be an adaptation to living outside the norm.
"Being in a situation which diverges from conventional habit, nocturnal types often experience this situation, may encourage the development of a non-conventional spirit and of the ability to find alternative and original solutions," says Professor Marina Giampietro, lead author of a study to be published in the February 2007 issue of the journal Personality and Individual Differences.
The Italian researchers, from the Department of Psychology at the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Milan, studied 120 men and women of varying ages.
A self-report questionnaire evaluated degrees of morning and evening dispositions. In fact, true morning and evening-oriented people are actually rare, since most of us fall somewhere in between.
Once the subjects were categorised into either morning, evening or intermediate types, they underwent three tests designed to measure creative thinking.
During the first activity, test subjects were asked to draw and title a picture based on an image shown by the researchers.
For the second activity, called incomplete shapes, test subjects added lines to create pictures out of straight and curved lines. They then were asked to give their pictures a title.
The final test was similar, only this time the individuals were presented with 30 pairs of vertical lines.
Scientists scored each completed activity on originality, elaboration, fluidity and flexibility factors.
Evening types aced each test based on these criteria, while morning and intermediate type people struggled to get scores over 50.
The researchers also discovered that age didn't curtail creativity.
"Our study supports the notion that creative characteristics persist in aged people," the scientists write.
Night owl? Blame your brain
Hans Van Dongen, associate research professor at the Sleep and Performance Research Center at Washington State University, helped to discover the biological explanation behind morning and evening types.
He and his colleagues found that a small group of brain cells, called suprachiasmatic nuclei, emit signals to the body that synchronise the time of day.
This biological clock runs two hours ahead in morning types and two hours later in evening types.
Morning and evening-oriented people may follow other schedules, due to work, school and other demands, but their preferred schedule is more in sync with this internal clock, which may be partly determined by genetics.
Van Dongen says that the finding about creativity and evening types is "certainly novel, and one I would not have expected on biological grounds".
He suggests that the observed differences in creativity might have to do with the fact that evening people also tend to be more extroverted than morning and intermediate types.
"One could reasonably envision a link between the personality trait of extroversion and the finding of creativity," Van Dongen says.

The Australian Alps had the thinnest and shortest snow season since at least 1982
Planet Earth had its sixth hottest year on record and a deluge of severe record-breaking weather, according to a new report.
The findings come from the World Meteorological Organization's (WMO) preliminary report on global climate data for 2006, released today.
"All over the world we are starting to see extreme weather records being broken," says Dr Michael Coughlan, head of the National Climate Centre at Australia's Bureau of Meteorology, which contributed to the WMO report.
"While we have had severe events in the past, there does seem to be a pattern now of increasing severity."
This year was the sixth hottest on record and 2005 was the second hottest.
"It's unequivocal that temperatures are rising," says Coughlan.
He says the WMO compared this year's temperatures with instrumental records dating back to 1861 and palaeoclimate data extending back thousands of years.
Drought
High temperatures and low rainfall through 2006, combined with an El Ni&ntilde;o, brought severe drought to much of southern Australia.
Major cropping zones had the driest and warmest 5 years on record.
And the Australian Alps had the thinnest and shortest snow season since at least 1982, and anecdotally for at least 40 years.
"In terms of the rainfall this is certainly one of the worst drought on record," says Coughlan.
Southeastern Australia also had record low temperatures in May and June and severe crop-damaging frosts in late September and mid-October.
This year's drought followed a 5 to 10 year decline in rainfall in southern and eastern Australia.
And in the case of southwest western Australia the downward trend in rainfall extends back 20 to 30 years, says Coughlan.
He says that in this area research by the Indian Ocean Climate Initiatve has linked the decline in rainfall partially to greenhouse gas-induced global warming.
But in southeastern Australia, where the downturn in rainfall is relatively recent, this link has yet to be made, says Coughlan.
Australia was not the only place affected by drought, says the WMO report.
Long-term drought was a problem in the US, Brazil, China and southern Africa, where at least 11 million people were affected by food shortages.
Flooding rain
The decrease in rainfall leading to drought in some places is accompanied by increases in rainfall elsewhere, leading to floods.
Overall, the trend in Australia is for increasing rainfall, just not in the agricultural areas.
Australia's tropical north had its fifth wettest wet season on record and tropical cyclone Larry in March was the strongest cyclone to make landfall in Queensland since 1918.
Flooding was also a feature globally.
The Indian monsoon, for example, brought the highest rainfall in 24 hours ever recorded in several locations.
Meanwhile, the Danube river reached its highest level for more than a century in April 2006 affecting tens of thousands of people in eastern Europe.
In May, floods in some of the New England area of the US were the worst in 70 years.
And the Canadian city of Vancouver had its wettest month ever in November.
Somalia is currently suffering the worst flooding in recent history with some places receiving more than six times the average monthly rainfall, affecting hundreds and thousands of people.
Last year also saw the largest ozone hole over the Antarctic and a continued sharp decrease in Arctic sea ice. Over 60,000 square kilometres (about two thirds the size of the state of New South Wales) is being lost a year.

Experts say the reduced HIV risk may be because cells on the inside of the foreskin, the part of the penis cut off in circumcision, are particularly susceptible to HIV infection
Circumcising men cuts their risk of being infected with HIV in half, and could prevent hundreds of thousands or even millions of new infections, researchers say.
Circumcising men worked so well that the researchers stopped two large clinical trials in Kenya and Uganda to announce the results, although they caution that the procedure does not make men immune to the virus. 
Public health leaders hailed the results as pointing to a potentially powerful way to reduce HIV infections in Africa, the continent hardest hit by AIDS. 
"It does have the potential to prevent many tens of thousands, many hundreds of thousands and perhaps millions of infections over coming years," says Dr Kevin De Cock, director of the World Health Organization's Department of HIV/AIDS. 
The US National Institutes of Health (NIH) study in Kisumu, Kenya, involving 2784 men aged 18 to 24 showed a 53% reduction of HIV infections in circumcised men compared to uncircumcised men.
A parallel study involving 4996 men aged 15 to 49 in Rakai, Uganda, showed circumcised men were 48% less likely than uncircumcised men to become infected. 
Researchers previously noticed that in places where circumcision is common, HIV is less common. 
Results of the first major study on the issue were reported last year out of South Africa, with researchers seeing a 60% reduction in HIV risk for circumcised men. Researchers view the results of the new trial as strong confirmation. 
Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the NIH's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases says the institute ended both trials early and offered circumcision to all men involved in them. The trials began in 2005 and were due to go until mid-2007.
HIV prevention
"These results indicate that adult male circumcision could be an important addition to an HIV prevention strategy for men. Male circumcision can lower both an individual's risk of infection and hopefully the rate of HIV spread through the community," Fauci says. 
Experts say the prevalence of male circumcision varies by region in African countries south of the Sahara, with large numbers of men in some areas remaining uncircumcised. 
Fauci says while the initial circumcision benefits would be fewer HIV infections in men, the practice could lead to fewer women getting infected in parts of the world like Africa where the virus is passed largely through sex between a man and woman, not homosexual sex. 
Another study is under way in Uganda assessing HIV infection risk for women with circumcised partners. 
Experts say the reduced HIV risk may be because cells on the inside of the foreskin, the part of the penis cut off in circumcision, are particularly susceptible to HIV infection.
HIV also may survive better in a warm, wet environment like that found beneath a foreskin. 
Circumcision just part of the story
Fauci says circumcision is not completely protective "and must be seen as a powerful addition to, not a replacement for, other HIV prevention methods".
He says the benefits could be negated by small decreases in condom use by men or if men add more sexual partners. 
"These results only apply to men where the risk of HIV transmission is through the penis. Transmission by injection drug use or receptive anal intercourse will not be affected by adult male circumcision," Fauci adds. 
De Cock says public health experts might encounter cultural and social barriers in parts of Africa to male circumcision. 
Of the 39.5 million people worldwide infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, 24.7 million are in sub-Saharan Africa. About 25 million people have died from AIDS since it was first identified a quarter century ago.

The newly discovered glider was an agile flyer and had pointed, sharp teeth that it used to eat insects
Gliding squirrel-like mammals that lived with the dinosaurs at least 130 million years ago may have conquered the skies around the same time as birds, or even earlier, scientists say.
The newly discovered flyer, called Volaticotherium antiquus or ancient gliding beast, extends the earliest record of gliding flight for mammals to at least 70 million years earlier than once thought.
A fossil of the creature, which represents a previously unknown group of mammals, was found in rock beds in northeastern China. 
"It is the first fossil record of a gliding mammal in the Mesozoic, in the age of the dinosaurs. Previously we have had no fossil record of a mammal that had the ability of flight," says Dr Jin Meng, a palaeontologist at the American Museum of Natural History in New York.
The find suggest other mammals from the Mesozoic era, from 248 to 65 million years ago, could have been much more diverse than scientists think. 
Meng and his colleagues describe the flying mammal in the journal Nature.
It is thought to be one of the most important discoveries of a major mammalian group since a review of Mesozoic mammals by Richard Owen in 1871.
"This mammal is so different from what we know of Mesozoic mammals. So we think it presents a new branch of early mammals," Meng says. 
The oldest previously known gliding mammal was a rodent. Bats took to the skies with powered flight about 51 million years ago. But the new gliding mammal is not a direct ancestor of any other living mammals.  
Small agile glider
The fossil shows the newly discovered mammal weighed 450 grams, was an agile flyer and had pointed, sharp teeth that it used to eat insects. 
Toe bones suggest it was also able to climb trees, critical for a glider to reach heights from which to take off. 
It had a large skin membrane from its fore to hind limbs that acted like an aerofoil during flight. There is also evidence of fur on the membrane and other parts of its body.
A long tail could have acted as a rudder during flight. 
Fossils of gliding animals are extremely rare. The scientists say the fossil record for gliding mammals is so scant because the small creatures are poorly preserved, particularly their gliding structure.
"Because they are small mammals and live in forests it is harder for them to be preserved as fossils," says Meng.

Golden coloured cocker spaniels are supposed to be more aggressive than black ones. But are other influences more important in shaping a dog's personality?
A dog's colour reflects a pooch's personality, scientists say, at least in one breed, the English cocker spaniel.
The latest study, recently published in the journal Applied Animal Behaviour Science, shows that golden/red English cocker spaniels exhibit the most dominant and aggressive behaviour.
Black dogs in this breed are the second most aggressive, while particolour (white with patches of colour) are more mild-mannered.
Earlier research suggests that hair colour is also linked to behaviour in labrador retrievers.
For this breed, the most aggressive are the yellow ones, the next most aggressive are the black dogs and the least aggressive are the chocolate coloured ones. 
The behaviour-hair colour connection is likely due to related genetic coding that takes place during the pup's earliest life stages, according to lead author Dr Joaqu&iacute;n P&eacute;rez-Guisado.
"Maybe the link [to coat colour] is due to the fact that the ectoderm [one of the three primary germ cell layers] is where the skin and central nervous system originate in the embryo," he says.
P&eacute;rez-Guisado, a Spanish researcher in the Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery at the University of Cordoba, and his colleagues measured levels of dominance and aggression in 51 seven-week-old English cocker spaniel puppies that were either full siblings or half siblings.
The tests looked at how quickly a person could capture a puppy's attention, how well puppies followed the individual, how the dogs behaved while restrained, how they exerted their social dominance and what they did when they were lifted off the floor.
In many cases, the golden-coloured dogs resisted human contact and even tried to bite the tester, while the particolour pups often wagged their tails and seemed to enjoy the attention.
While genes control coat colour and appear to predispose behaviour in certain dogs, P&eacute;rez-Guisado says how dogs are raised plays the biggest role in behaviour. 
He shows that environmental factors account for 80% of dominant, aggressive personalities while genes only influence 20% of dogs' demeanours.
"It is very important to give the dog an optimum and suitable environment in order to have a dog with a low dominance aggressive behaviour level," he says.
"For that reason, owners are primarily responsible for this undesirable dog behaviour."
Hardly surprising
Canine behaviourist and trainer Wendy Volhard and professional breeder Carolyn Sisson, who is president of the English Cocker Spaniel Club of San Diego, California, both say they're not surprised by the findings.
They say that the link between coat colour and behaviour has been "a well-known, old wives' tale" for years.
Although they both think there is "some truth to the recent findings", Sisson believes a dog's genetic lineage, going back many generations, is a better indicator of temperament than colour.
Sisson says there are 29 recognised different coat colours for English cocker spaniels, and combinations other than golds mating with golds can result in a golden dog.
"It's the line breeding out of puppy mills in England that probably resulted in the dominant traits," Sisson says.
"The very best and worst of my dogs have been spaniels. They seem to cover every behavioural extreme," she adds.
Looking at DNA
P&eacute;rez-Guisado and his colleagues next plan to study the English springer spaniel and English cocker spaniel genomes to pinpoint common genes associated with so-called dog rage and colouration.
Earlier research has also found that hair type may indicate a dog's temperament.
In a study, wiry-haired mini dachshunds were often more feisty than their mellower, long-haired cousins.

Hundreds of planetary nebulae with intriguing shapes like this helix nebula have been found by an Australian-led team
The discovery of over 1000 glowing planetary nebulae could help balance cosmic accounts, says an international team of astronomers.
The researchers say that their discovery could help them calculate what happens to stars' missing matter, mass that seems to be 'lost' when they die.
Dr Quentin Parker, of Australia's Macquarie University in Sydney, and colleagues, say they have found 900 new planetary nebulae in the Milky Way and 500 in the neighbouring Large Magellanic Cloud.
"Planetary nebulae are the death throes of stars," says Parker, who is also with the Anglo-Australian Observatory. 
They are glowing regions of ionised gas that average-sized stars like our Sun throw off when they get old.
The gas the dying star ejects interacts with the environment around it, such as the interstellar medium, to form weird and wonderful shapes.
These have been given names like the cat's eye, hourglass, helix, ant and red spider.
Missing matter
Studying planetary nebulae helps tell us about how stars' matter is recycled from old to new stars.
Nebulae last for tens and thousands of years so it's important for astronomers to study both young and old ones. 
In general, it has been a lot easier for astronomers to find younger nebulae because they glow brighter.
But Parker and colleagues have been able to find the fainter older ones and are now confident that they have representative sample of different ages, especially of nebulae close to our Sun.
The mystery about dying stars is that they seem to lose much more mass than what appears to be thrown off in their nebulae. Some 85% of the mass appears to be unaccounted for.
Parker hope that analysing the hundreds of new nebulae discovered will help explains where the extra mass goes.
In the team's more detailed study of the Large Magellanic Cloud the team has found numerous extremely faint haloes around 60% of the planetary nebulae there.

Tapping Boswellia tree for frankincense in Eritrea
If Jesus was born today, the three wise men might have had to substitute frankincense for another gift, according to new research suggesting that production of the fragrant substance is in trouble.
Frankincense, an aromatic hardened wood resin obtained by tapping Boswellia trees, has been an ingredient in perfumes and incense for thousands of years.
The Bible says that at Christmas, the magi brought gifts to Jesus of gold, frankincense and myrrh. 
Now ecologists from the Netherlands and Eritrea warn that current rates of tapping frankincense from Boswellia trees are endangering sustained production of the aromatic resin.
Writing in the December issue of the Journal of Applied Ecology, Professor Frans Bongers of Wageningen University says that over-tapping the trees results in them producing fewer, less viable seeds.
And production, in the Horn of Africa, is declining because Boswellia woodlands are failing to regenerate.
The ecologists hypothesise that poor regeneration, due to intensive tapping, means trees are diverting too much carbohydrate into resin at the expense of reproductive organs such as flowers, fruit and seeds.
They tested the theory by looking at how many seeds were produced by intensively tapped trees in southwestern Eritrea compared with untapped trees, and their germination rates.
"At all study sites, trees subject to experimental tapping produced fewer flowers, fruit and seeds than trees that were exempt from tapping," Bongers says.
"Furthermore tapped trees produced smaller fruits with seeds of lower weight and reduced vitality than non-tapped trees."
The ecologists suggest changing the way trees are tapped, by reducing the number of tapping points per tree and enabling rest periods, would help ensure production is sustainable.
"In order to control the decline in fruit and seed production, less intensive tapping procedures should be developed," they write.
"As our results show that six tapping points per tree are already having a negative impact, we suggest reducing the number of tapping points.
"New tapping regimes should also include rest periods when there is no resin harvesting to allow the trees to recover."
The study is the first to show the fragile relationship between extracting wood exudates and tree regeneration in natural populations.

Embryonic stem cells have been harvested from mouse embryos produced without sperm
Mouse embryos created through a 'virgin birth' process called parthenogenesis show that egg cells can be a source of valued embryonic stem cells, researchers say. 
The cells can be closely matched to the immune system of the recipient, making them a potential source for transplants, the researchers report today in the journal Science. 
There are fewer obstacles to developing these stem cells than by using cloning technology, also called somatic cell nuclear transfer, researchers say. 
"I think it is a much more real-world possibility than nuclear transfer," says Dr George Daley of the Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School in Boston, who led the study. 
If the experiment could be reproduced in humans, such cells might provide an alternative way to produce tailored tissues for transplanting, or for studying disease, Daley says. 
"We are aggressively trying to produce human parthenogenetic embryonic stem cells," he says. 
How did they do it?
The researchers say they have produced dozens of genetically matched mice embryonic stem cell lines by means of a novel procedure called parthenogenesis.
The word comes from Latin and Greek roots meaning virgin beginning and the process occurs when an egg cell starts dividing to produce an embryo without using sperm to fertilise it. 
The researchers generated stem cells from unfertilised mouse eggs, screened them to ensure they would not be rejected by the rodent's immune system and then injected them back into the mouse. 
The customised cells were successfully transplanted and yielded many, but not all, types of specialised tissue, possibly because of the absence of any male DNA. 
The study establishes the principle of using unfertilised eggs as a source of customised embryonic stem cells that are genetically screened to ensure they carry the genes that allow the recipient's immune system to recognise them, making them fit for transplantation therapies.
Scientists have experimented with parthenogenesis in mice before, but this is the first time that the procedure has yielded the embryonic stem cells or so-called master cells that have the potential to develop into any other type of cell in the body. 
The study's authors are particularly encouraged because the unfertilised mice eggs produced embryonic stem cells 70% of the time.
This suggests, the researchers say, that this technique is a much more robust and effective way of generating this highly sought-after genetic material than the current alternative, nuclear transfer. 
Daley says the cell lines could also be studied for a better understanding of the basic biology of disease. 
"For instance, a woman with a genetic condition - some kind of early-onset Parkinson's, bone marrow failure - you could use them as an in vitro model of the disease," he says.
Still, Daley cautions that there are safety concerns with the procedure, which requires the egg to be chemically tricked into spitting out half its genetic material, leaving it with one set of female chromosomes. 
In particular, tissue obtained in this way can carry some risk of cancer and abnormal growth. 
"We'll have to demonstrate the safety and durability of cells from parthenogenetic embryonic stems cells before we could imagine any clinical use," says Daley. 
Human eggs?
Still, Daley and his team have begun experimenting with the procedure in human eggs, using eggs discarded by women undergoing in vitro fertilisation treatment at Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital.
So far, they have not been successful in isolating human embryonic stem cells from these eggs, which are typically 25 hours old by the time they reach the laboratory.
The research team plans to recruit female volunteers to donate their eggs for research purposes a year or so from now, with the hope that these eggs will deliver better results.

Flares from the Sun are random events but are usually only big at high points in the cycle of solar activity, when this image was taken
Communication systems are being disrupted by the effects of an unusually large solar explosion that started lashing the Earth this week.
The explosion could also cause spectacular auroras in the night skies as far north as Sydney, weather permitting.
Dr David Cole, director of the Australian Government's space weather service, says the massive solar explosion as the Sun is supposed to be in a fairly quiet phase.
"We didn't expect anything in particular and suddenly this turns up and it's really fierce," says Cole, of IPS Radio and Space Services in Sydney.
When magnetic fields in the Sun coalesce in dark regions called sunspots they can explode sending a blast of radiation. Such solar flares reach Earth within minutes.
This is followed by a cloud of plasma or coronal mass ejection (CME) that takes a day or so to reach Earth.
The flare and CME alter the ionosphere, the outermost part of Earth's atmosphere, and cause problems with communication systems.
Unpredictable
Although solar explosions are random, they are more likely to happen when the Sun is most active, during what is called a solar maximum that happens every 11 years. But there is currently a solar minimum.
Cole says solar flares are hard to predict because there are no models of how they work.
While Coles' agency suspected something might happen when they saw a sunspot pointing directly at the Earth and a build up in magnetic fields, they couldn't tell exactly if or when an explosion would occur.
"It's like someone snapping their fingers, you don't know when they're going to do it," he says.
GPS and short-wave communications blocked
Cole says the solar flare that reached the Earth mid-week, had possibly the strongest emission at 1.4 gigahertz ever seen, matching almost exactly the wavelength GPS satellites use. 
He says communication with GPS navigation satellites in the lower ionosphere was blacked out for up to two hours.
Short-wave radio communications, used by defence forces, aviation and emergency services, were also affected, says Cole. Such communications pass through or bounce off the ionosphere. 
But Cole stresses air traffic control does not rely on short-wave communication.
Fire fighters affected?
Another CME reached Earth today and Cole predicts its effects on short-wave communications will last throughout the weekend.
It might also affect short-wave communication of some personnel currently fighting Australia's severe bushfires.
He says his agency will let such emergency services know which frequencies will be unaffected by the CME so they can use these instead.
Cole says electricity grids close to the poles could also be disrupted today by the CME.
Cole says the same sunspot produced caused less serious explosions earlier this month and may cause another in around two weeks time.
Spacewalkers take cover
While humans on Earth are protected from the effects of solar explosions, those in space are vulnerable, says Cole.
For instance this week astronauts on the shuttle Discovery and the International Space Station have been sleeping in protected areas and may need to cut planned spacewalks short if radiation levels get too high.

With the new system, individual sensors in a network detect an environmental condition, like temperature, and tell their neighbouring sensors about it. This creates 'clones' that perform tasks based on what their neighbours are doing or sensing
It has the classic elements of a good spy story: secret agents that infiltrate a network and clone themselves to do the work of many. But this story has a happy ending.
The agents in question are mobile, self-contained pieces of software that can take over sensors in a wireless network and direct them to accomplish specific tasks.
The technology could help fight fires, monitor environmental conditions, or even help blind people navigate buildings.
"Our software is the first to allow this flexible sharing of a sensor network infrastructure," says Professor Gruia-Catalin Roman, chair of the department of computer science and engineering at Washington University in St Louis.
Most existing wireless sensor networks are built with small devices called motes.
Each mote includes a battery, a computer, a radio and a sensor that monitors variables such as light, vibration and temperature, takes pictures, or listens for sounds.
Such networks can consist of hundreds or even thousands of motes, and they can be placed just about anywhere it might be useful to pick up information from the environment.
Most of them perform a single task, for example monitoring temperature or vibrations in the air. Re-tasking generally requires configuring each sensor anew.
"This is a major problem. Since these systems exist in the real world, the dynamics and unpredictability often require new solutions," says Professor Jack Stankovic of the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, who is not associated with the research.
To overcome that limitation, Roman, colleague Assistant Professor Chenyang Lu and their doctoral student Chien-Liang Fok have developed a software system called Agilla.
Once equipped with the software, individual sensors in a network can detect an environmental condition and communicate with the neighbouring sensors.
This creates 'clones' that perform tasks based on what their neighbours are doing or sensing.
In laboratory experiments, Roman and his colleagues used the agents to monitor simulated fires and help robots navigate around them.
In a real-life situation, a firefighter could potentially tap into the network with a PDA and learn where the fire is and how intense it is.
"Agilla is small enough to fit on motes, general enough to support many kinds of functionality. I think it is also efficient enough to be viable," says Stankovic.

Nanowires can function as highly sensitive tuning forks, scientists say
Scientists say they have made the world's strongest nanowire, reaching the theoretical limits of what they'd planned to build.
The nanowire, which is about 1000 times thinner than a human hair, is so strong it could support 16 African elephants if it was scaled up to the size of a child's finger, says Associate Professor John Sader from Australia's University of Melbourne.
Sader is part of an international team of scientists that grew the semiconducting nanomaterial, publishing the results in the journal Nano Letters.
"The ultimate strength we report is the highest recorded for any semiconductor material system and is at the theoretically predicted limit," says Sader, who was involved in measuring the strength of the wires using an atomic force microscope.
"This indicates that these nanowires are near perfect materials." 
Experts say that such nanowires could one day be used to make electrical and electromechanical devices like environmental sensors or even ultra-precise clocks.
To built a nanowire
The nanowires were built from germanium, an element the researchers say has similar chemical properties to tin.
They built the material on a surface coated with gold nanocrystals, which allowed the germanium to nucleate and grow.
They then tested the strength by placing it across a small trench and manipulating it sideways.
They found it could bend and stretch further than any other nanowire anyone had ever made, sustaining 15 gigapascals before snapping.
This was roughly the same as the predicted ultimate force, compared to many other semiconducting nanowires, which snap at just 15% of their theoretical limits.
If the wire was one centimetre in diameter it could hold up to 100 tonnes without breaking, he says.
This resilience will result in failproof nanodevices, says Sader, adding it is not theoretically possible to make a stronger nanowire.
"This exhibits the theoretical limits, so this is basically it," he says.
Tuning forks and metronomes
Professor Paul Mulvaney from the University of Melbourne's school of chemistry, who wasn't involved in the research, says the nanowires could be used as sensors to detect gases, air pollutants or biological agents.
This is because they function as super-sensitive 'tuning forks' that change frequency when molecules become attached to them.
"Because the wires are so small, they can detect very small amounts of materials absorbing onto their surface," he says.
They could also be used as nanoscale metronomes that vibrate in high-frequency timing devices or in computer chips, he says.
Germanium nanowires are also ideal candidates for making optical devices like light-emitting diodes and tuneable lasers, Mulvaney says.

The batfish has literally emerged from the blue as a potential saviour of dying coral reefs
A fish that gatecrashed an experiment in Australia's Great Barrier Reef has surprised scientists by emerging as an unexpected weapon against the worldwide decline of coral reefs.
Scientists from the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies (CoECRS) had been studying ways of reversing the effects of coral bleaching at a reef near Orpheus Island in the World Heritage listed marine park.
Part of the research involved generating a bloom of the tropical kelp sargassum weed and seeing if local weed eating fish would chomp their way through it, says CoECRS director Professor Terry Hughes.
While herbivorous species like the parrotfish and surgeon fish only nibbled disinterestedly at the algae, the batfish (Platax pinnatus) turned up and cleared the weed within two months.
"The surprising finding ... was that a different group of fish was responsible for reversing the algal bloom," Hughes says.
"Batfish are normally considered to be plankton feeders so we were amazed when we captured on video the effects those fish were having."
Chief investigator Professor David Bellwood of the CoECRS and James Cook University says the batfish's voracious appetite for weed saved the coral from being choked to death.
"In five days they had halved the amount of weed. In eight weeks it was completely gone and the coral was free to grow unhindered," he says.
Weed warriors
Bellwood says declining coastal mangroves serve as nurseries for batfish, which are found in reefs around the world.
This highlights the need to preserve mangroves and protect these accidental weed warriors, he says.
Other reef weed-mowers like the green turtle and dugong, are both seriously endangered, he says.
"If Platax is the last grazer of dense weedy stands on inshore coral reefs and it goes into decline the capacity of these reefs to recover ... could be lost," he says.
Reporting in the journal Current Biology today, Bellwood describes the batfish as a "sleeping functional group", or a species with a hitherto unrecognised role in reef life.
Adapting to climate change
The study is the first extensive demonstration of the role of fish in promoting the recovery of coral reefs, Hughes says.
He says it shows that reefs can adapt to climate change, which has been linked to coral bleaching and subsequent overgrowth of weed.
"We're only beginning to scratch the surface in terms of the changes that climate change is already causing," he says.
"I am of the opinion that coral reefs have already started to adapt ... I think we'll see a shift in the abundance of particular species depending on their ability to respond."

Designers and engineers are sharing information online about how to build a better car, free from patents and profit margins
The open source movement responsible for software like Linux and the browser Firefox is proving contagious. Now a German entrepreneur is applying the same approach to designing a car.
Former BMW employee Markus Merz, who now owns an automobile consulting firm in Dingolfing, Germany, calls his project Oscar, shorthand for Open Source Car.
The idea behind open source development is to allow anyone to copy, modify and redistribute ordinarily secret information about a technology without paying royalties to the original developers.
The project, which Merz calls his hobby, is bringing together automobile engineers, designers and other experts on online forums to exchange ideas on how to improve mobility, specifically car design. 
The hope is that, unrestrained by patents and other conventional restrictions such as profit margin, marketing and technology, a community of experts will come up with fresh solutions.
"We [usually work] in front of the computer to generate stuff that people in front of a computer will use. It's boring," says Merz.
"It would be a great idea to combine the idea of open source with the idea of hardware, and a car is hardware that is interesting."
Designers share ideas online 
A website serves as headquarters for the concept car. Participants interact according to a few simple rules about performance specifications.
For example, the car will be about 4 metres long and 2 metres wide, and will have four doors. It will be powered by electricity and have a maximum speed of about 150 kilometres per hour.
Participants discuss their ideas on online forums organised into four main topics: integration, which includes design, package and distribution; modules, which includes discussion of the body, engine and safety systems; tools, which includes conversations about computer-aided design tools and simulations; and network, where participants discuss potential partnerships.
A group of technicians heads each forum to ensure that the best ideas are moved forward to computer modelling and testing. From there, anyone, including car manufacturers, will be encouraged to build the car.
There will be no patents, and no proprietary data.
"The most effective tool you can have to get anything done is passion and creativity and that needs to be unleashed, and then it's much more powerful than money," says Lukas Neckerman, head of automotive business development at a financial services company in Munich.
Oscar is also a hobby for Neckermann, who is responsible for communications.
Encouraging creativity
Mechanical engineer Achim Schillak agrees that people have a desire to contribute their ideas to innovative projects, and if they can't do that in their current occupation, they will find another outlet.
Schillak wrote a case study about Oscar while he was studying business management at New York University.
But he believes that there are some limitations applying the open source approach to cars.
"After design studies and calculations, you have to build a prototype and crash test it and that is a major difference to developing some software," says Schillak.
And Oscar is not set up to build the car. But Merz has faith that any of several small auto manufacturers could eventually take the concept to its 3D form.
"The greatest success for me would be if I can ride in this car," says Merz.

Should people take cod liver oil capsules, which are rich in vitamin D, to prevent MS?
A new study provides the most compelling evidence yet that vitamin D, the so-called sunshine vitamin, may protect against the neurological disease multiple sclerosis (MS). 
Harvard University researchers who reviewed the medical data of more than seven million US military personnel found the risk of MS fell dramatically as the level of the vitamin circulating in the blood rose. 
The effect was only seen in Caucasians; the data in the study for African Americans and people of Hispanic descent was inconclusive. 
The relationship was particularly strong in the under-20 age group, according to the study published today in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
Individuals who ranked in the top 20% of the sample for vitamin D levels had a 62% lower risk for the chronic autoimmune disease than those in the bottom 20%. 
The study also found that there was a 41% decrease in risk for MS with every increase of 50 nanomoles per litre of circulating vitamin D. 
"The study strongly suggests that vitamin D has a protective effect, and one which could potentially prevent thousands of cases of MS," says co-author Alberto Ascherio, associate professor of nutrition and epidemiology at the Harvard School of Public Health.
The findings add to a growing body of evidence that vitamin D could reduce the incidence of the incurable condition. 
But Ascherio says it is still insufficient to make the case for an increase in the recommended daily dietary intake of vitamin D.
"It's important to establish whether it's a true causal relationship," says Ascherio.
He says the question should be urgently addressed by means of a trial that would enrol volunteers and assign them to take the supplement. 
MS is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system that afflicts some two million people worldwide.
It is more common among people with northern European ancestry, according to the US National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
The illness can be relapsing and remitting or progressive, with symptoms that range from fatigue and slurred speech to tremors, stiffness, poor coordination and in the most severe cases paralysis.
Vitamin D, dubbed the sunshine vitamin because it is naturally produced in skin that is exposed to the Sun's ultraviolet rays, is thought to rein in the overzealous immune system cells that cause the condition. 
For more information on MS, including information for patients and their carers, see the MS Australia website.

Humans may be able to understand a dog's bark because all mammals speak a universal language
What do dog barks have in common with bird tweets and human baby cries?
All appear to communicate basic emotions, such as fear, aggression and submission in somewhat the same acoustic way, according to a new study in the journal Applied Animal Behaviour Science.
The find suggests a primitive communication system may unite virtually all mammals.
The theory could help explain why previous research has found that many mammals, including humans, understand the vocalisations of different species.
For example, a study in the journal Language Communication shows young children can identify simple emotions conveyed in macaque calls.
For the recent research, Professor P&eacute;ter Pongr&aacute;cz and colleagues studied how well people could describe the emotional content of several artificially assembled bark sequences.
The barks were based on sounds made by a mudi (a Hungarian herding dog) and covered five emotional states: aggressiveness, fear, despair, playfulness and happiness.
Pongr&aacute;cz, a professor of ethology at E&ouml;tv&ouml;s Lor&aacute;nd University in Budapest, Hungary, and his team then compared the listeners' answers to the barks' acoustic features.
The scientists discovered that changes in three basic sound qualities - tone, pitch, and the time between barks - determined how listeners perceived the barks.
In general, high-pitched barks with longer intervals between each bark were rated as less aggressive than lower-pitched barks heard in frequent succession.
Just like humans
Human babies make similar changes in sound quality when they cry, except frequency range appears to be more important than pitch when they express their needs.
This link between pitch or frequency and perceived emotion appears to carry across many different species, according to Pongr&aacute;cz, who cited an earlier theory proposed by avian expert Professor Eugene Morton.
"His basic argument was that, according to the general physical laws, larger bodies emit sounds characterised by lower frequencies and these are also noisier/atonal. Thus receivers can predict the size of the sender," Pongr&aacute;cz and his team write.
"This relationship could have formed the basis of an evolutionary ritualisation process whereby low-pitched vocalisations tended to signal aggression because larger animals are more likely to win contests ... and high-pitched vocalisations became predictors of submission or friendly intent."
Since the people in the dog study also linked barks signifying despair, happiness and playfulness, the researchers suspect dogs and humans share a unique ability to communicate with one another that goes beyond the proposed universal mammal 'language'.
The scientists believe years of domestication have improved the way that dogs, versus their wolf ancestors, can communicate with us.
They point out that such communication isn't limited to vocalisations. It also includes visual signals, such as changes in looks.
Common house cats also appear to have evolved improved means of communicating with humans, according to a study conducted by Cornell University researcher Nicholas Nicastro. Cats, however, seem more intent on manipulating us.
"Though they lack language, cats have become very skilled at managing humans to get what they want - basically food, shelter and a little human affection," says Nicastro.
Alan Beck, professor and director of the Center for Human-Animal Bond at Purdue University, says that we have to be careful not to interpret behaviour according to "our projection of intent".
But he admits dogs might be able to communicate with us through their barks.
"As dogs and humans share some basic non-verbal communications, it is very possible that verbal ones also exist," Beck says.

Your music would be grouped in 'islands', which you could see on a screen. The more jazz in your collection, for example, the steeper the contours of the jazz island. And when you hover over the island, you'd see a list of songs floating like clouds
Music fans are downloading digital music and storing hundreds, if not thousands, of songs onto smaller and smaller devices.
Yet organising those songs remains a throw back to the days of vinyl, an uninspired structure of artist, album or track.
Researchers have now developed a program that automatically organises a collection of digital music files into a virtual landscape.
Instead of digging deeper and deeper through categories and subcategories of songs, you fly over an archipelago of sound-specific islands.
"It could work like a flight simulator," says Peter Knees, a PhD candidate and project assistant at Johannes Kepler University in Linz, Austria.
"You see landmarks that relate to style. If you dive deeper, it will reveal artists and then deeper to see individual songs."
Such a visual experience with digital files could fuel the music industry in new ways, says Ichiro Fujinaga, associate professor at the Schulich School of Music at McGill University in Montreal, who is not associated with the research.
"Good solutions may allow vendors to sell more music," he says.
So far, the solution Knees and his team propose organises about 500 music files. It's capable of analysing tens of thousands, but the researchers are keeping things simple while they make refinements.
The software analyses certain features from the audio signal, such as how much bass or treble exists and sound patterns that have to do with rhythm and tempo. Then the program clusters similar sounding pieces into regions of music.
The more similar pieces the user owns - let's say, Latin jazz - the higher the terrain on the Latin jazz island.
The user flies over the landscape using a joystick. As she approaches an island, she will hear an auditory impression of the musical style of the region. She also sees song titles, artist names, and even images floating like little clouds above the landscape.
If she wants to hear a specific song, she simply hovers over it. Or if she wants to hear anything from Latin jazz, she hovers over the region.
There are some things the software doesn't address, Fuinaga points out, such as the user's profile (is she a teenager or an opera buff?) or the listening context (is the person driving, showering on a date?).
And as good as any 3D music interface might be, some people are still sceptical about whether it's really necessary. But then, is a US$500 mp3 player really necessary?
Knees and his team are currently developing the program for a public exhibition at an Austrian science museum that specialises in new media technology.
Museum goers will be able to play with music files already stored in the computer or download their own files to see what their collection looks like.

Latest image of the first light in the universe
Fresh evidence of the first objects to emerge after the Big Bang has left scientists debating what these could be.
Researchers say the cosmic glow could be the first stars or quasars, but are not sure which.
Dr Alexander Kashlinsky and colleagues at the  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center will report their findings in the 1 January issue of The Astrophysical Journal.
Using NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope, the researchers analysed infrared radiation from deep space.
They first removed the bright signal of recent galaxies in the foreground to detect the the ancient background glow.
The researchers saw clumps in this infrared background radiation they believe comes from the first objects to emerge from the Big Bang.
"Observing the cosmic infrared background is like watching distant fireworks from within a brightly lit city," says Kashlinsky. 
"It's as if we have turned off the city lights one by one to see the bursts more clearly."
Building on their study published in the journal Nature last year, the researchers say they could be picking up light from the earliest stars, stretched to infrared wavelengths by the expansion of the universe.
Alternatively, they say the distant glow could be from quasars - large black holes that consume enormous amounts of gas and debris and re-emit the materials in powerful burst of energy.
Less certain the glow comes from stars
Last year the researchers were reportedly certain the signals from deep space were from the earliest stars.
Kashlinksy says this was because his team failed to explain that current equipment does not allow the researchers to pinpoint individual sources of the radiation.
"We did not make this point sufficiently clear in the Nature paper in 2005 and, hence, added a caveat on this in the new papers," says Kashlinksy.
"While we can't resolve each spark in the fireworks, we can see the large scale structures and their glow."

The way your gut microbes digest food could influence your body weight, scientists say
Bacteria in your gut may determine whether you are skinny or obese, according to scientists who say that food, exercise and genetics may not be the only things to influence body weight.
US scientists have discovered that levels of two types of good bacteria in the gut that help to break down foods are different in obese and lean people and mice.
The finding, reported today in the journal Nature, could lead to a better understanding of why some people may be prone to obesity and help find new ways of preventing or treating it. 
"Our gut microbial structure should be considered when understanding the elements that might regulate our energy balance and may predispose us to obesity," says Professor Jeffrey Gordon, of the Washington University School of Medicine in St Louis.
"There is something very startling about the amount of fat you have and the structure of your gut microbial community," he adds. 
There are trillions of bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract, but two groups called the bacteroidetes and the firmicutes are the most dominant and their proportion varies in lean and obese mice and humans.
The scientists found that the proportion of bacteroidetes bacteria is lower in obese mice and people than in lean people. 
But when Gordon and his team studied 12 obese people who followed low-calorie diets for a year, they found their levels of bacteroidetes rose as their weight decreased. 
"They increased as the weight is lost and in proportion to the amount of weight loss," says Gordon. 
The results suggest that there may be a microbial component to obesity. But scientists do not yet know if people start out with lower levels of bacteroidetes or firmicutes that may make them prone to obesity. 
"These are things we are exploring now. What are the signals between the amount of fat and different groups of bacteria that exist in the gut," says Gordon.
University of Cincinnati researchers, writing in an accompanying commentary in the journal, say:
"This is a potentially revolutionary idea that could change our views of what causes obesity and how we depend on the bacteria that inhabit our gut. But a great deal remains poorly understood."

This komodo dragon was a 'virgin birth' at London Zoo recently. Another batch is expected at Chester Zoo this Christmas
Flora, a pregnant komodo dragon living in a UK zoo, is expecting eight babies in what scientists say could be a Christmas virgin birth. 
Flora has never mated, or even mixed, with a male dragon, and fertilised all the eggs herself, a process culminating in parthenogenesis, or virgin birth.
"Nobody in their wildest dreams expected this. But you have a female dragon on her own. She produces a clutch of eggs and those eggs turn out to be fertile. It is nature finding a way," says Kevin Buley of Chester Zoo.
He says the incubating eggs could hatch around Christmas. 
Parthenogenesis has occurred in other lizard species, but Buley and his team says this is the first time it has been shown in komodo dragons, the world's largest lizards. 
Scientists at the University of Liverpool discovered Flora had had no male help after doing genetic tests on three eggs that collapsed after being put in an incubator. 
The tests on the embryos and on Flora, her sister and other dragons confirmed that komodo dragons can reproduce through self-fertilisation. 
"Those genetic tests confirmed absolutely that Flora was both the mother and the father of the embryos. It completely blew us away because it [parthenogenesis] has never been seen in such a large species," Buley says. 
A komodo dragon at London Zoo gave birth earlier this year after being separated from males for more than two years. 
Scientists thought she had been able to store sperm from her earlier encounter with a male.
But after hearing about Flora's eggs, researchers conducted tests that showed her eggs were also produced without male help. 
"You have two institutions within a few short months of each other having a previously unheard of event. It is really quite unprecedented," says Buley. 
The scientists, reporting the discovery today in the journal Nature, say it could help them understand how reptiles colonise new areas.
A female dragon could, for instance, swim to another island and establish a new colony on her own. 
"The genetics of self-fertilisation in lizards means that all her hatchlings would have to be male. These would grow up to mate with their own mother and therefore, within one generation, there would potentially be a population able to reproduce normally on the new island," Buley says.

This giant sauropod weighed a massive 48 tonnes, eight times more than Tyrannosaurus rex
The fossilised remains of a gargantuan plant-eating dinosaur, one of the largest animals ever to walk the Earth, has been found in Spain.
The giant would have been up to 38 metres long and weighed as much as seven elephants.
Turiasaurus riodevensis, named after the region and village in Spain where it was found, lived about 145 million years ago, the research team reports today in the journal Science.
It was a sauropod, the familiar kind of dinosaur with a long neck, long tail and massive body that walked on four stout legs. 
Sauropods are the largest land animals in Earth's history and this particular one is the largest dinosaur ever found in Europe.
Previous dinosaurs of this scale have been found mostly in the Americas and Africa. 
This one is emblematic of a previously unrecognised branch of European sauropod evolution, the scientists say.
"This discovery is the dream of a palaeontologist," says co-author Dr Luis Alcala of Fundaci&oacute;n Conjunto Paleontol&oacute;gico de Teruel-Dinopolis in Spain. "Really, I'm not dreaming?" 
The dinosaur came from a time right at the boundary between the latter two periods of the Age of Dinosaurs, the Jurassic and Cretaceous. Relatively little has been known about European dinosaurs dating from then. 
Scientists believe this dinosaur spent its days munching plants in an area close to the shoreline of the ancient Tethys Sea, forerunner of the Mediterranean Sea. 
The first bones were found in an abandoned wheat field near the village of Riodeva in northeastern Spain in May 2003, Alcala says. 
Alcala says it weighed 40-48 tonnes and was 36-38 metres long. Tyrannosaurus rex was a baby by comparison, weighing just 6 tonnes and about 13 metres long.
The Spanish dinosaur's humerus, the bone in the front leg that extends from shoulder to elbow, was as big as a full-grown man. 
Turiasaurus rivals the size of the largest known dinosaurs, all sauropods, and its remains were more complete than those of many of them.
These include the African giant Paralititan, Seismosaurus in North America and Argentinosaurus and Puertasaurus in South America. 
"It's a tremendously large animal, not quite to the scale of the 'land whales', things like Argentinosaurus and Puertasaurus or Sauroposeidon. But it's pretty darned big," says Dr Thomas Holtz, a dinosaur expert at the University of Maryland who was not involved in the research.
"This is the first real super-giant from Europe," Holtz says. 
Other fossils found at the site indicates Turiasaurus lived alongside other dinosaurs, including two-legged meat eaters, other sauropods and plant eaters similar to the armoured Stegosaurus. Turtles and crocodile-like reptiles were also around at the time.
The researchers say Turiasaurus was more primitive from an evolutionary perspective than other known giant sauropods. 
The team found 70 pieces of the fossilised remains representing about a quarter of its skeleton, including fragments of the skull, leg, back, toes, ribs, shoulder blade and teeth. 
Finding most of the key parts, the only vital missing piece was the pelvic girdle, allowed the scientists to ascertain its dimensions and appearance.     
Other well-known sauropods include Apatosaurus (formerly known as Brontosaurus), Brachiosaurus and Diplodocus.

Researchers have found DNA associated with nanoparticles from kidney stones. Could these strange particles be nanobacteria?
Researchers who've found strange nanoparticles in a handful of kidney stones say these self-replicating specks may play a role in disease.
The US researchers are not sure whether these tiny particles, 50 to 100 nanometres across, are living nanobacteria or just some strange non-living self-assembling ball of chemicals.
"We have some evidence that would support either possibility," says kidney specialist Dr John Lieske of the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine.
He and colleagues report their findings in the December issue of the Journal of Investigative Medicine.
At some point in their life about 10% of people will get kidney stones, a painful condition in which calcium deposits clog the kidneys.
Scientists aren't sure what causes these deposits. But one theory that Lieske and colleagues are investigating is that tiny calcium-covered particles are partly to blame.
Previous research has found such particles in human serum, urine, renal cysts from patients with kidney disease, as well as in kidney stones.
Lieske says some researchers dub the particles nanobacteria, and propose they are a new disease-causing agent.
But Lieske says there is not yet enough evidence these particles are alive.
Nanoparticle investigation
Lieske's team isolated the nanoparticles, which have a protein-lipid core surrounded by a calcium phosphate shell, from kidney stones. 
The researchers grew the nanoparticles in culture over a period of four to eight weeks.
They found that antibiotics and metabolic inhibitors slowed the particles' growth.
Then the researchers grew a large batch of nanoparticles, dissolved the calcium shells and extracted proteins and DNA.
Does all this mean that the nanoparticles are nanobacteria after all? 
Lieske says it's still too early to say.
"There definitely is DNA associated with [the nanoparticles]," he says. "But is that a contaminant?"
He says some fragments of the protein and DNA appear to match known bacteria.
His team now plans to grow more nanoparticles and see if they can find a unique genetic signature that would prove the nanoparticles are indeed nanobacteria.
Scepticism
Geologists and astrobiologists have also considered the possibility of nanobacteria over the years. For instance, understanding the full range of life forms is important in our search for extraterrestrial life.
Professor Malcolm Walter of the Australian Centre for Astrobiology in Sydney, says there has been much scepticism about nanobacteria.
